expert ready boom all right we're live
hello John what's up man hey Joe how you
doing sir doing so I really appreciate
it thanks a lot for having me man it's
great I heard you on meteor podcasts and
it blew my mind I mean I could not
believe let's just let everybody know
what this is about you were a game
warden now you are a game warden right
and what that normally entails is like
you know you find a guy and he's got
three trout when he's only supposed to
have two it's normal stuff like catching
people doing something they're not
supposed to just making sure people
follow the rules right along the way you
guys started discovering these illegal
grow-ops we're cartels were growing
marijuana and you turn from being a
regular game warden to essentially well
once you let us know what how it worked
out yeah Joe it was it was a crazy
journey because you don't think of game
wardens doing the type of work we were
doing when it come to the the trespass
gross and the cartel issue you know and
what do everybody think they think
anyone's check fishing licenses yeah
check your deer tag RL tag look for too
many you know animals poaching
spotlighting and honestly when I started
the job I got hired back in 1992 that's
what I dreamed of doing you know I grew
up hunting and fishing and I got my
hunter safety certificate with dad's
help at nine years old so I was all in
the woods you know was there my church I
just loved it because three generations
of family my grandfather's career Navy
my dad you know as an army guy and you
know we just had conservation in our
family you know for generations so I got
the job get it I did all the traditional
stuff to start came down here to
Southern California to start my career
in Riverside County so I was just over
the hill you know from from LA here and
working all the traditional stuff
fishing regulations night hunting you
know working deer openers is really cool
to be a deer hunter for all those years
and then actually go you know talk to
guys on the other side and see all the
good guys out there and some problems
and then in 1995 I got to go back home
toward the Silicon Valley that's where
I'm originally from born and raised so
live in the suburbs kind of the foothill
areas of the Silicon Valley south to San
Jose there
and in 2004 I've stumbled into my first
you know cartel what we call a trespass
marijuana grow site and you know to
specify this stuff now now that we're
regulating you know the last couple of
years here in California these are not
sanctioned marijuana sites this isn't
the legitimate industry that's doing it
by the numbers and trying to this is
always illegal these are always here you
know on public lands destroying our
environmental waterways and our wildlife
and on private land as well and on that
situation I had a good friend of mine
that I grew up with that was doing his
master's thesis at San Jose State
University both of our alma mater on
steelhead trout endangered species
red-legged yellow-legged frog and all
the aquatics and these two creeks and
this was right below Henrico State Park
where I really met my first game warden
that was an inspiration to get the job
so these waterways are really sensitive
headwaters coming down through this
stretch for like three miles all these
endangered species in a black tail deer
you know all these other great animals
we like his conservationists they're
thriving on this Creek and he called me
one day in April and said hey John this
is weird one of my two creeks is bone
dry and all the fish the steelhead fry
are dead you know everything living on
this Creek is dead there's a bunch of
like debris and plastic lining and looks
like camping stuff that's down at the
bottom of where this Creek feeds out so
I get him in the truck
and I figure I'm thinking okay someone's
diverting water up there it's probably a
rancher Nina for cattle operation
whatever we go the top of the hill Joe
then we start the hike down and I'm by
myself you know I got my I got my rifle
got my gear don't have any radio
coverage don't have any cell phone
coverage and I have an unarmed civilian
my partner biologist with me and we're
expecting to find something very
predictable that I'd seen up to that
point and that would have been a normal
water diversion and when we found the
water source in a beautiful Canyon I
mean crystal-clear water trout Creek the
whole nine start hiking down it
following this we see the dam we see the
water line about a hundred yards down
this beautiful little Grand Canyon like
Creek and there's much marijuana plants
and they're short because it's early in
the season they're only about two feet
tall and we see two growers and they're
not the growers
typically you know that I would have
suspected these guys are you know they
got rifles they got handguns they got
knives and they're kind of cruising
working their plants coming toward us
and that was that oh shit moment you
know if something crazy goes down right
now and I got no backup
I got a civilian with me these guys are
armed they're not your typical poacher
that I've ever encountered and we didn't
get seen we kind of hid out you know
he's a hunter I'm a hunter we stayed you
know using her stalking and stand to the
creek bank and just just watched as
these guys work their plantation and
went on up the hill and I looked at this
and where did we just walk into this is
crazy we got out safely and that's when
I started to bring in other agencies
narcotic groups Task Forces the
Sheriff's Office met you know started to
learn other agencies in my area this is
really on in the game what did you guys
do about that one grow up like when you
found it like how did how did they
resolve that well we got a team together
as fast as we could safely and usually
it takes a couple of weeks and I want to
say within a month we were back there
now the interesting part was game
wardens aren't known for doing this type
of work just like you said at the start
right so they're like well you guys know
the area you went in there help us find
it get us into the area but we're gonna
lead the raid and will self course this
is your jurisdiction we don't normally
do this type of stuff so so go for it so
we were the bird dogs we kind of guided
him into the area we had like 20 30
officers we kind of let him down to the
canyon got him in there safely we found
the two growers we spooked them they
didn't get caught that day they ran down
the canyon
nobody pursued some of us wanted to
obviously because of the environmental
damages but the biggest thing had
changed the game for me that day was
seeing the environmental damage so that
was a 7,000 plant garden and at the time
we didn't know about these ban toxic
substances these insecticides carbo
fearin that they're bringing up from
Tijuana and transporting actually
smuggling from across the border to put
on these plants to keep everything
living off of it not to impact their
cash crop and that was out there in some
extent but it was so early when we're
really aware of the level of toxicity to
this stuff and how damaging it is so was
all new
we eradicated that that garden and then
when we were done eradicating it we had
all this mess in the creek right we had
camp trash we had fertilizers pollutants
propane tanks all over in this beautiful
channel that's now dry exes been
diverted unbeknownst to us all that
water was totally poisoned that they
were diverting to water the plants
that's why that Creek was so dry and we
we eradicated everything and then it was
like okay we're out of here and I looked
around and went oh wait a minute man I
know we got the I know we got the
illegal marijuana out but what are we
gonna do about all this environmental
damage and nobody was reclamation the
damage or cleaning up any of this mess
so I the first thing I thought was we
have a resource issue that's crazy I
mean I've you know spent my whole career
up to this point protecting wildlife
preserving waterways for all of us to
enjoy
you know conservationist enthusiast
whatever side of the fence you're on and
nothing was getting done on that so kind
of the light bulb went off a little bit
that we need to do more to this if we're
gonna get involved and we need to get
involved in these type of grow
operations because it was the biggest
environmental you know train wreck I'd
ever seen and I'd worked a lot of
traditional gamer and stuff to protect
those resources so once they had gotten
everyone out and chopped all the plants
up or did what they did did they try to
reclaim the the creek did they try to
remove the dam and get the water to run
back again at that time no no one is
doing it right and that's that's exactly
really what really really kind of upset
me and again we were new at the game we
were the game wardens nobody really
thought of us as mainline law
enforcement or you know Narcotics Task
Force guys or anything like that at the
time so I wasn't gonna make waves we
just wanted to integrate and work
together we wanted to unify these teams
and what I really wanted to do at this
point is get back with my command staff
and you know my bosses and go hey we got
a big big problem out there man and
right there's more of this going on and
we need to be involved even though it's
not traditional because we're sworn to
protect our resources and well besides
everything game wardens do that you
think of from the wildlife standpoint or
mainline law enforcement just like every
police officer right we
through the same training and then what
people don't realize is we go through
two more months of additional training
and a really long Academy that's all
wildlife specific wildlife forensics
wildlife ID weapons identification all
the things you really need to do the
game or inside of it with wildlife you
know in the backcountry so to speak but
we needed to integrate with other
agencies and kind of bring them into our
world if we were going to participate so
that one case started the change in me
to try to build those relationships and
get into tactics and tactical circles
with some of these you know SWAT and
Special Operations units that would go
in and do this job under normal
circumstances if that was just being
diverted by a rancher so if a rancher
had done that and the cake was dry how
would you how would you fix that we
would have got with him and it was
what's called a stream adulteration
violation and as 16:02 in our Fish and
Game codes the section but and it's a
very common section because water is
diverted for a lot of reasons and you
can divert water with a permit in
certain circumstances but you can't
completely denude a creek that has
Wildlife thriving that's a waterway of
the state for everybody to enjoy which
this one was and if normally the case
would be that they would have to Reeve
just have the the flow come back to
exactly how it was before so exactly the
dam and yep that would be up to the
rancher that would be up to the rancher
would be part of a penalty you know it
could be a civil it could be a criminal
it could be a probationary fix-it your
okay so this was no real there's no law
involved or nothing in place rather just
when you found these grow-ops like there
was no previous precedent right exactly
it was it was completely brand-new and
this was you know one of the first grows
I think that any of us have found
throughout the state of California is
game wardens I mean there are other guys
finding some things and working but
being from the Silicon Valley and being
inspired by those wild lands to
everything I became later and what I
stand for it was home you know when it
hit home but seeing that and getting to
meet certain guys from the Sheriff's
Department my first book goes into this
whole learning experience of you know
ad-hoc jumping in with other agencies
and doing it is this the hidden war this
was the first book war in the woods
war in the woods yes so the war in the
woods and then hidden war is the new one
yeah hidden
the brand-new one that just came out and
they're basically 10 years apart and the
cool part about that Joe is when you
look at the difference as we do some
major comparisons and what war in the
woods covers is that chapter ones that
first mission I'm telling you right now
because that was like being here it is
right we're not in Kansas anymore
it was crazy the people at the
higher-ups yeah that we're in charge of
trying to eradicate the grow up and take
the cartel the guys down what so there
that was their job was just handling
that it was just handling the the
marijuana aspect of it right right and
the armed cartel guys so there was no
one in place that was supposed to take
care of the waterway there wasn't that
seems so crazy today it does it was one
of those things that it was it was based
on the fact that a conservation group
like from an agency like Fish and
Wildlife like us we just weren't
involved where we would be looking at
those environmental damages right right
but from a narcotics officer standpoint
you may see the damages but it may not
register there might not be a you know a
mandate or even objective to clean that
stuff up and and back at the time DEA
was funding all of our states and all of
our county teams based on the number of
marijuana plants we eradicated so there
wasn't any recognition of the
environmental damages and any type of
funding based on how much reclamation
and cleanup you didn't know I would
change fortunately and we were that we
were a big part of making that change
fortunately but and there wasn't a lot
of funding or you know point kickback or
value to catching bad guys to catching
some of these guys that were doing the
damages so a lot of teams then were
dropping in on helicopter lines cutting
plants getting a big plant count getting
funded for it taking taking the weed out
and that was it so crazy like yeah I
would imagine I mean obviously I don't
work in law enforcement no but I would
imagine there would be one person who
would like detail plan right and I would
think that well what happened well we
found out that this Creek was yeah yeah
okay well we've got to resume the creek
yeah wouldn't that be like part of the
plan it would and it you would think it
should be right but it's all basically
new territory completely new and so
we're only talking about 15 years ago
well which is really crazy yeah it was
it was the start of a big shift in my
career because I saw this as a big
problem
I also up until in 2005 we were on you
know one of our first second third since
third operation since this one we just
mentioned in 2004 ending August 5th of
2005 the game completely changed because
that's when we were involved in our
first gun fight and that's when my
partner warden who had trained in the
Academy we were partners in the squad
I had promoted to be the lieutenant for
two and a half counties the Silicon
Valley Santa Clara County Monterey part
of San Benito 20 days before this
incident happened and I had young
wardens that wanted to participate and
do some of the stuff I was doing with
the other agencies on the marijuana you
know operational front and this was you
know right above the tech capital of the
world right there in Silicon Valley in
Los Gatos we were in really steep arid
country you know August right before the
a zone deer opener we were all gearing
up for that and was three game wardens
three sheriff's officers good sheriff's
officers that we met on that first
operation in 2004 I just gave you the
story on and um they were in harvest
time they were fortified they had heavy
weapons like SKS is the ak-47 derivative
sawed-off shotguns and they had the
grouse set up where they were basically
defending it and when we came in there
was an ambush shot from one of the
growers and that was the one shot the
bad guys got off and unfortunately
that's the shot that hit my partner
through both legs and that bullet went
through the right thigh and tumbled
through his right leg then kept going
through his left so he's down and we're
trying to keep him from bleeding out of
four holes for the better part of three
hours waiting for an air rescue and we
didn't you know nobody in the country
from the standpoint of a law enforcement
team had ever been counter-attacked by
these growers we'd you know we chased
him around they run away sometimes we'd
find weapons oftentimes we wouldn't but
so this was just a real eye-opener like
what the fuck did we just walk into and
plus my partner was real close to not
making it and fortunately he did survive
or I don't know that we'd be sitting
here telling this story and talking
about it but that day when I saw how
well they were equipped
the type of weaponry they had and the
fact that I don't almost didn't come
home that day I went okay this is super
dangerous we can't do this as standard
patrol Game Wardens we can't do this
doing just the traditional stuff we
should stay involved in it because aside
from being so violent the environmental
damage is Joe we're the worst I'd still
ever seen and they just kept getting
worse and worse the more operations I'd
work in my home county right so we
learned a lot from that there were a lot
of tactical lessons there are a lot of
team lessons a lot of things we could
have done different and that kind of
changed the game where we eventually got
to what we're going to talk about a
little bit later now since 2004 have
there been plans implemented to clean up
but also restore waterways and all the
different absolutely yeah absolutely and
so now there's like a whole they realize
this is an issue and so there's there's
precedent there's very much so and and
that largely came from what we saw you
know in those early years the 2004 first
stop on down there on Dexter Canyon
Creek and then what we had on Sierra's
ol well my partner was shot in 2005
about then we started also see the
banned poisons in these grows like the
carbo fury on bottles and just to give a
background this stuff is so deadly it
was made as an insecticide rodenticide
just to kill anything that you put on
any type of agricultural product and it
was made originally back and I think
like the 50s for legitimate agriculture
and then they found out how toxic it was
an EPA banned it from use or even
possession it's a felony to have it in
the country and use it anywhere without
special licenses through legitimate
channels here in America and they ban it
like 15 years ago because it was so
nasty but because it does keep
everything off the marijuana plants I
mean nothing can even get near it
without dying almost instantly they
still get it in third-world countries
they can get it in Mexico and it gets
smuggled across the border with the grow
groups the drug trafficking groups
because it's so effective regardless how
poison it is and we were starting to see
more and more of that stuff as we were
starting to ramp more of a specialty to
do in this job more you know thoroughly
and safely and get into the cleanup this
is one of the many things I brought this
up with Dan Crenshaw the other day and I
talked about you and because he's
against federally
getting marijuana federally legal and I
said one of the problems with it being
illegal is this and I was explaining
these grow-ops that for the rest of the
country where marijuana is illegal right
the vast majority like what was the
number that you said the percentage that
was is grown in California that's
illegally sold through the rest of the
country 7080 percent so 70% of the
entire marijuana population or marijuana
product that you're buying if you live
in in place like South Dakota wherever I
don't even know it's legal in South
Dakota wherever it's illegal right
they're buying it from here exactly and
it's because one of the reasons is
because our state laws say that well
first of all we're close to Mexico so
the cartel members can come up really
quickly right and then the other problem
is that our state laws one we made
marijuana legal recreationally here weak
severely lowered the penalty for an
illegal grow-op it became a misdemeanor
correct that was the that was the thing
you know when when we started the the
department's special team that the
SpecOps marijuana Enforcement team that
hid more goes into part of my job is
being the co-founder of that and the
team leader was outreach so I was
speaking to legislative groups before we
legalized under Prop 64 and then the
tighter medicinal marijuana laws that
came about that same time and I was
talking to anybody
conservation groups that you and I would
you know be part of preservation animal
rights groups high school kids you know
it assemblies right watch out you know
if you're using weed make sure you're
not using this stuff because it's so
nasty things like that and my whole
point was if we're gonna regulate guys
we see it comin let's just regulate
smart
let's not lessen any penalties for the
trespass grow that the cartels are doing
in our public lands and private lands
and also the other gang groups and
there's there's other groups you know to
a smaller extent but unfortunately when
we did regulate and all that was passed
two years ago they did water it down so
publicly and cultivation went to like
you said a felony to a misdemeanor and
if you're a juvenile cultivator on
public private land and one of these
juvenile you know cartel members and
there's a lot of young ones learning
it's a it's an infraction and that took
a lot of
assists away from that part of the
problem and left us out there basically
alone with a couple other agencies to
fight it well for the average person
that would sound before you knew about
the cartel grows that would sound like a
good idea well hey if marijuana is legal
what's the problem what's a big deal
exactly then the other problem is these
people that are buying this marijuana in
the rest of the country it's highly
likely that they're gonna have some of
that pesticide on it right and how bad
is that stuff is that stuff ever killed
someone from smoking this illegal
marijuana we don't know if it's killed
anybody directly because by the time it
gets distributed throughout the country
it does dissipate a little bit but it's
still highly toxic to put it in
perspective about three years ago we had
two federal officers back east not even
in California in a public land grow that
had all that toxic on it so they have
cartel grows out there they do they do
they actually coast we have them in
about 20 25 to 27 other states to a much
lesser extent and something we need to
look at is California I mean we're one
of only six Mediterranean climates on
the whole globe so we are a great weed
growing state just like our wine
industry man we got great great weather
for it so we can grow outdoors and
indoors
I mean February to almost December right
and that's why it's grown here and
that's why the black market both in you
know the private land communities and
the cartels are everywhere across the
country with this stuff but they'll go
wherever they can - you know diversify
the network so we do have it in other
states to a much lesser extent and then
something we need to remember is even
though about half the country has these
grows in them to a lesser extent in
California these same groups are under
the same Enterprise they're humid doing
human trafficking doing gun running you
know to fuel the fight down in Mexico
methamphetamine production and now the
new synthetic fentanyl that's just
killing thousands especially on the East
Coast are coming from these groups so
it's all one enterprise and of course we
focus on the cannabis issue because
that's what's affecting our while lands
in our waterways it's right at the hub
so yeah it is it's it's nationwide it's
not a California problem and we made
really really careful even though we're
talking about a team in California game
wardens we're trying to tell a
nationwide story because the nation
needs to know well it seems like you I
mean it
just seems like it is you guys were not
trained for this right and there was no
one else there so it was like like hey
put it on the game wardens they're gonna
have to handle this now which is really
to me kind of insane it is but then at
the flipside we're really passionate
about protecting what you and I love
right our wild lands and our waterways
and our wildlife especially so we have a
passionate interest in protecting you
know those resources and not to mention
keeping our public safe in the same in
the same breath because these are in
public areas I mean we have a lot of
these in national parks we have like you
know not only you have the armed gunmen
that could you know shoot a hunter or a
hiker and equestrian anybody in the
outdoors and enjoys are you know what
the great outdoors have to offer but you
have you know all the other threats that
come with that you know it's not just an
armed gunman they're putting pun Jeep
it's literally vietnam-era punji pit
Sanh some of these trails land a punji
pit for people don't know absolutely so
back in the Vietnam conflict with the
Vietcong would do to deter our American
soldiers is they dig a pit underground
on a trail it'll be about 18 to 20
inches deep and you know square to kind
of cover a whole trail then they cover
it up with bamboo or leaf litter so it
just looked like the trail and then our
soldiers would kind of walk and they'd
step into that and here's the sharpened
sticks out of bamboo they're super sharp
and they're pointed upwards so when you
step into it you're going to share a
shin you're going to puncture you know
your leg maybe an artery and they would
put human excrement excuse me on the
points to induce bacteria induced
infection and basically take our
soldiers you know out of the operation
well we started seeing 2015 and the
first one we found was actually in the
National Park up in Shasta County and
Whiskeytown
and it was a punji pit going into a grow
site on a public trail I mean it was
hundreds of yards Joe from the grow but
anybody could have walked in on it we
were running an operation with Shasta
County and this is when we had our
full-time dedicated team in the Hidden
War era and our point man was about to
step into this thing and arcanine Phoebe
that I'm sure you know we talked about a
nun Steven show that I'm meat-eater and
also Mike Ritland who has a show called
Mike drop and he's a seal team
three veteran and k9 trainer he really
got into the dog stories right we talked
about that but Phoebe amazing dog she
had been trained to sniff these banned
poisons so she could smell it you know a
mile out with that amazing nose our
canines have and right before our point
man was about to step into it Phoebe
alerted em Brian pulled everybody back
her handler and my teammate and sure
enough he did some digging and pulled
back the tarp and then here's this punji
pit and it had the banned toxics
actually on the sticks so what would
that have done if one of us had stepped
into it so that was a real aggressive
anti-personnel technique that could have
you know
that could have decimated a hunter or
hiker or anybody else so so that was or
wildlife yeah some of these pit traps
for wildlife and these big you know
wells they're diggin in cisterns and
they're doing this to keep people out or
they're doing this for animals like what
what are they doing something like that
is has to be targeted against people but
we have there's a lot of different
things for animals too there's a lot of
things to keep animals away from the
plants they'll do you know they'll dig
big pit traps that are they'll put
garbage in them or they'll use them like
when we were in the middle of our really
severe drought that we just came out of
here in California a couple years ago
all these mountain streams were just
bone-dry so they would go to the lower
lands and we were doing a lot of work
you know in the Delta region and
Sacramento Delta and the lowlands and
they even if they you know we're getting
water from the Delta and the Raceland
would dry up they would dig and dig
wells 20 30 feet deep and they'd leave
them open and they're getting water from
them and pumping out water out of the
bottom but those stay open so yeah our
big you our big game animals drop into
those or we could drop into them so
multiple hazards yeah exactly what is
the is there an estimate of how many
cartel members are growing in this
country right now if you say there's 27
28 states is that what you say what is
that is there a rough estimate of how
many cartel members are here right now
doing this kind of stuff this comes to
you know it's it's a real approximation
because you only know based on who you
catch or graph enable the debrief but
like in California we know from the
amount of grows we we deal with every
year just on the trespass you know
cartel front and the number of
operatives it takes to run
grow and get it started and then to
harvest it I mean a conservative
estimate ten thousand ten thousand yeah
I'd say conservatives California just in
California and the reason we say that
and I always go very conservative
because it's such a kind of a silent
enterprise and it's really hard to get
some of this data but we've we've just
validated it through the numbers of
things we run across you know when you
look at the fact that it takes two
skilled growers that are vetted because
they cut their teeth down to Mexico
doing it effectively under the
Federalist knows and they grow well and
and and you mentioned this one yet Mike
Baker on the show which was interesting
and you hit it on the head when you said
man these guys are really resourceful
you know you got a you respect their
work ethic and now and you have to
because they're they're hiking water
line they're hiking infrastructure in
they're covering their tracks they're
out there for six months at a time
you said they were walking around with
carpet strapped to their feets that
didn't leave footprints yeah in hid more
especially we have a whole lot of photos
in that book about things we've seen on
trail cameras and they will put felt
lined lined soft felt on their shoes tie
them up tight and if they're walking
like an Old Forest Road you know that's
got a gravel base you'll never see that
track I mean you know you you've tracked
big game I've done it you know it's the
same type of technique and if you don't
have any sign I mean they're really good
at disguise and we actually found a guy
and I have a picture of this in the book
and also in the PowerPoint when I when I
teach to this throughout the country cow
hooves actually carved out of wood
because a couple years ago we were you
know the US Forest Service a lot of this
grow problem is on or national forests
you know Northern California
northeastern California not so much
Silicon Valley where I started but the
rest of the state even down here and
what these guys would do is there's
cattle leases on those properties where
you know ranchers can run cattle on part
of the forest and you know or a joint on
private property and we were getting
tips on a bunch of grows you know or
you've seen them from the air or hunter
or angler would report or we'd have a
suspicion because of a waterway or do we
get see some plants from satellite or
whatever and we go try to find this grow
and we're picking up tracks and we're
you know we we're pretty good at finding
these things now we've been trial and
error in it for a lot a lot of years but
we're seeing a lot of cattle tracks
because we're
running around with cows and sure enough
they were putting on cow hooves and
strapping them on top or underneath
their their boots clomping around to
disguise themselves as cattle clever
right and then once I get way up into a
deep canyon where they're gonna put
their grow they just take them off and
throw them in a backpack and then the
light bulb went off we better look at
you know our tracks a little more
carefully so how do you guys try to go
about finding these things do you do you
rely on people reporting them or do you
have like aerial surveys but how do you
it's it's a mix of all of that we get a
lot of reports from people on the ground
and our best reporting parties or what
we call our peas are hunters and anglers
hmm when it comes to the outdoor public
but anyone in the outdoors could run
across some but hunters and anglers
especially because where do we go when
we're gonna find a good waterhole for
elk or you know we're hunting rock tail
we're gonna go you know we're not gonna
stay on the beaten path man we're gonna
go down to the headwaters we're gonna
find a pristine area we're going to get
away from people so all the people that
are going the deepest into the
backcountry absolutely absolutely and
then they're finding the water you know
source and they're maybe they're
following it and it's dry or it's
diverted like what I found in 2004 that
started this whole craziness and then
they run into a grow we also do find it
from the area you know we do all
agencies it's no no secret no no
tactical reveal we fly to look for this
stuff from the air I have a friend of
found one on Tejon ranch really yeah
yeah two years back and I didn't think
anything of it I thought it was just
some crazy person decided to try to grow
pot yes this back before was
recreationally legal okay and there was
no shootout or anything crazy like that
they got there after yeah either they
realized that their grow-op had been
compromised and they took off but you
know Tejon Ranch is enormous it's like
270,000 acres yeah and just the the gall
of these guys to go deep into that ranch
and set up this grow site right and the
guys who work there they I guess they
just stumbled upon it
I think they stumbled upon it because of
garbage - if I remember correctly yeah
that that follows track and the thing
now you're talking about a private
hunting ranch just got a cat Elise and
all that
huge we've done a lot of good stuff with
tyonne Ranch and supported you know good
hunting programs there but an
interesting statistic when I retired
last year in December in 2018
you know I mean we keep stats ever since
one of the cool things about the our
specialized team started in 2013 is we
solidified all the documentation to be
spot-on
you know reporting was kind of haphazard
throughout the state we weren't sure
what other agencies were doing but we
knew what we were doing now and so I'm
keeping that data and there was a real
shift in just public land presence of
these cartel growers and by the time I
retired last year it was almost a 50/50
split
so ranches like tone ranch a private
hunting club in the Silicon Valley one
up in Shasta County so you know where
they're doing big-time conservation
projects to get Blacktail and mule deer
and tule elk and everything else up in
numbers and now they've got this
presence on their hunting Club hitting
one of their sensitive waterways you
know so so it's it's not just a public
land thing and it's really good for
everybody listening to know that you
could find it anywhere and you stumbled
on it and it's funny you mentioned the
reporting parties the cool thing after I
did Stevens show on a meat-eater and
talked to those guys we sort of get tips
you know I actually got a tip and you
know and it's it's in play and I won't
say too much more about it but we'll
definitely we'll be talking when it's
all over and done but it's it's going to
get handled and uh it's so cool to see
the guys like you and I that hunt and
love it and love the passion of what's
out there are out there stumbling on
this stuff and getting out safely and
and we're fired up enough not to wait
you know we're calling people to say hey
it's out there can you help us RIT's
award and sheriff's or are you ever guys
getting an sense of hikers or anyone
didn't shot at or yeah it's happened
it's happened fortunately it doesn't
happen a lot where we have a lot of
fatalities but I want to say about five
six years ago we had a father-daughter
combination on a deer hunt up in one of
the DS owns in northeastern California
and they were shot at by kartell growers
going in on a deer Oh up on her to try
to harvest her first deer you know she
was coming up through the program yeah
it was horrible unfortunately they
weren't hurt they got out of the area
they reported it
we've had people run out of you know run
out of Gardens by by some of these
growers we have had other shots fired
and we've had people just stay out of
because once they see it or they see a
guy holding a weapon like that in a
marijuana plantation they know isn't
legit they're out of there so is there
an area where they I mean it's all
public land mostly or in private land
ranch land right but is there an area of
the state where they there's more of
them you know that's what I thought when
I started I mean you heard about the
humble you know community the unknown
triangle right we're just the hub of it
and I thought it was more prevalent
there and it's certainly massive up
there but I mean I'm from Silicon Valley
where I'm from you wouldn't think of
those foothills in that part of the
state you know being so overrun and
during those what I call you know the
formative years of learning this and
getting involved in it and specializing
in it and we were really I got to give a
shout out to the Santa Clara County
Sheriff's Office and the guys then that
took as long as equals and my partner's
that really brought us in as you know
not only tactician x' but tracking and
able to identify sign as wardens doing
the hunting thing in the woods where we
could go and really specialize at this
and and be a lot safer and do it a lot
better than when my partner got shot
no.5 and we were doing 25 public and
private land cartel grouse in the
Silicon Valley at least 20 to 25 a
season geez that's a ton that's insane
and that doesn't seem I mean you're only
for folks who don't know what the season
is explain that yeah the eradication
season what we call that you know the
grouse season when we operate the
heaviest is usually an early start would
be sometime mid May and then we go all
the way to like about the end of
September and I mean there's you know
there's some wiggle room on both ends of
that depending on water and how long the
winner goes but but for me to pretty
much stand of September so it's going on
just somewhere in the neighborhood of
five to six months and you're looking at
yeah operations yeah and that's in just
Santa Clara County as an example and we
when we form the full-time team in 2013
and we had representatives and we have
representatives on our marijuana
enforcement team our fishing you know
our agency-specific team we would we
have guys covering every part of the
state and responsible team members
spread out covering every County and as
of now and we've been well we had six
full operational years before I retired
now it's in good hands and the team's
doing fantastic or
we've had at least a grow if not several
in every county in the state and most
counties multiple so to put it in
perspective on an average yard team
would do 125 missions if not more so
that's 125 grow sites that we were
responsible for doing the work up the
planning going in and doing the
apprehension the stocking to catch these
guys with our canines and with our
tactics then doing the eradication and
90% of them are all you know tainted in
that Ferdinand the carbo fear and
sometimes to the point that it's so
freshly applied that we can't touch the
plants for a couple of weeks we can't
even even with protective gear with
nitrile gloves face protection masks the
whole nine is dangerous it's that
dangerous and no exaggeration to put it
in perspective the two officers on the
federal level that we're exposed just
ingested some of those fumes and you get
blindness you get nausea you can't
breathe they were out of circulation
fortunately not fatally but they're out
of circulation for weeks sometimes
months and federal osha came down with
the Forest Service and of course working
closely from the state level we suddenly
were under a lot of protocol on
decontamination what we couldn't touch
and you know new new basic tactics for
our safety for human safety came down
and it changed the game so these guys
putting this stuff on there we may not
be able to even touch the plants or even
cut them safely or put them in Nets and
contaminate all our gear until it has a
chance to sit dissipate a little bit and
that's 14 days so what would you guys do
if you stumbled upon something and you
knew that it was freshly applied would
you just have a bunch of office or
standby and guard the area to make sure
these guys didn't come back to try to
reclaim the plants as best we could
because here's the problem with that you
know you get a big grow and you know you
can't go in and touch these things for
you know a couple of weeks maybe it
could be I mean it could have been
applied that day it could have been
applied four days ago we hit it we're
not sure so we'll give it a 14 day
window what we'll keep an eye on it but
at the same time we're doing all these
other missions right and we're not
getting everything and and how people
were talking in I mean would guys have
to camp there sometimes yeah sometimes
so your guard can hike and yeah we've
we've set on grouse we've camped out
overnight for several days we've
surveilled drop points and you know
watched you know these guys come and go
and try to make sure they don't come
back and you have limited resources to
begin with right so you guys are the
initial jobs to protect wildlife and
you're supposed to be doing that so how
much of an impact has that had on
wildlife because you've guys have been
diverted to these illegal grow-ops
exactly well you know you hear the term
the thin green line right yeah and kind
of what I'm all about being a game word
and now in Phase two in retirement I'm
really trying to speak more nationally
to what the Phinn Green Line is and it's
never been thinner and the fingering
line basically just represents you know
game wardens and forest rangers Border
Patrol but from the wildlife in the
military of course but from a wildlife
protector standpoint now that we have
this cartel grow problem and you just
hit it on the head rather look at the
resources it takes and all that
traditional stuff that we used to do
that we still do those problems aren't
going away
right so we still have to check you know
the night hunter we still have to deal
with commercial wildlife sales and all
this the ivory importation issue and the
wildlife trafficking that's just blowing
up so we're getting thinner and thinner
and stretched further and further game
warden numbers aren't growing very much
anywhere in the country yet the
population and the impacts of people
destroying wildlife especially on this
cartel front just keep as a survey being
you guys are in charge of ivory
importation as well we deal with all
that yeah Wow yeah we have teams now in
our agency and most of the states do
call wildlife trafficking teams and it
was a good program that came out of the
Obama administration that all the states
had to do it we were kind of already
doing it but we had to formalize a
little bit and that was an added
challenge that happened right after we
formed the whole cannabis enforcement
program which started with with the
tactical unit that I you know Co formed
and ran and then all these watershed
enforcement teams popped up for cannabis
regulation to check the new licensed
growers people trying to do legitimately
in water use and make sure there weren't
you know abuses then wildlife
trafficking became a huge issue the
commercialization of wildlife is a huge
billion dollar industry worldwide on
everything from abalone to sturgeon Road
black bear gall bladders and now ivory
especially the black pale girl
gallbladder one is so weird it crazy
yeah yeah it's it's just it's like a
Chinese medicine thing right yeah yeah
yeah it's an aphrodisiac yeah but it's
not no it's not real but in Albert I
think it's BC no BC even though black
bear hunting is legal for food yeah you
can't open up the the stomach contents
right they don't allow them to gut it
because they don't want people to be
incentivized to sell gallbladder grab
that goal it's so strange so you can eat
the bear yeah but you can't even open up
the cavity the body cavity so like the
heart goes to waste other parts that
people might eat yeah yeah which which
we'd like to see so strange it is but
again it gets back to greed and profit
and market right when a gallbladder can
be worth forty thousand or more or ycs
yeah
forty thousand yeah that's not much
that's how much a gallbladder can be
worth with the black market right is
that frickin crazy it doesn't do
anything yeah crazy it doesn't but
because it believe that it does and it's
one of those exotics that I got to have
and I can't get blackberry so horn yeah
exactly like like run or anything so we
I did a lot of that type of work before
I went into this with this met focus and
it just shows you how many challenges
game wardens have to do and it's not you
know the old traditional game warden
just out checking those licenses anymore
I mean over thousand we're overwhelmed
yeah that's no exaggeration now because
this is now a problem that people are
aware of have there been significant
resources that have been allocated to
try to handle this stuff like cuz are
there new yeah like programs to train
these young officers coming up - is
there like a specific task force that
handles that and then the rest of the
guys handle fish and wildlife or is it
just same people but now you have a
whole different level of responsibility
yeah that it's really cool in California
because we are one of the most
progressive you know game warden
agencies and it's interesting because I
just spoke at the back in July I spoke
at the new Weah conference which is
basically the annual game wardens
conference for all of us from all over
the country so get to work all the
states and you know Florida has some
tactical unit for some stuff
Texas has it and we're the first state
to have a dedicated you know kind of
tactical unit for this this cartel grow
threat because it's it's so big in
California but to share that with
everybody nationally in my world in the
fingering line and for them to start
having it happening on their refuges and
even just to know this stuff's getting
back to their parts of the world and
poisoning their cannabis users you know
unsuspectingly horrible information
right but we need to know it and a lot
of guys didn't know it and so that was
one thing to see hey what we need to
have a baseline training and the way we
do it here in California is we all go
through a really stringent Academy
everyone gets their basic tools arrests
control and defensive tactics you know
and firearms training all of that and
get good at being the traditional game
warden and doing all the traditional
stuff and they get you know get their
feet wet out doing their own thing for a
couple years and then we start to find
the people that have the motivation or
want to get onto a specialized unit like
our met team or one of the watershed
teams or the wildlife trafficking team
very seldomly do we put a fresh person
there because you know I think to really
be a good game warden you got to cut
your teeth on all the traditional stuff
that's critical it just happened it
having to check guys with guns all the
time you know most cops look at that and
go that's crazy I mean everybody you
check has a knife or a firearm yeah well
fortunately ninety-nine percent when
we're guess I Q a me that want to see a
game warden and game warden wants to see
us but for that one felon that's on
parole and he's in the woods hiding out
and we run across that a lot and I I ran
across a ton of that down here in SoCal
really at the start of my career and
I've got some interesting stories about
that but so guys who are like didn't
skip bail and then they go and hide yep
and they've got like a no-bail warrant
they're wanted on some warrant somewhere
and so they're off fishing they have an
illegal firearm maybe they're a felon in
possession of a firearm they can't even
have and now they're out in a remote
area where no cops gonna find me here
and then on the new game warden in
Riverside County you know all freaking
motivated really green I don't know
totally what I'm doing yet and I'm in
that truck cruising and something I got
into down here that was just crazy but I
will say this it was a heck of a
learning curve and I'm really blessed it
went out the way it did and it was I was
safe in it but we would get gangbangers
from LA here
and they would go over into Riverside
County and get into my kind of rural you
know foothills and on the edge of the
National Forest and they'd have ak-47s
and they'd have you know automatic
pistols and they would spotlight through
these canyons gunning for everything
they kill rabbits that kill coyotes they
kill deer they get to the end of like a
canyon that has like uh an outlet of a
dam throw a gill net out and spend all
night they're just gill net and fish and
hunting freely and shooting and killing
everything with their spotlights grab
their gill net grab hundreds of fish
pack up and then head back you know back
to the LA basin gangbangers I'm not
kidding and the craziest portion
gangbangers yeah commercial almost
commercial fishing does it does it
sounds nice right right and what would
they do with the fish Oh they'd eat him
maybe they'd sell them you know who
knows usually with quantities that big
they were getting sold but the thing
that was crazy is I would be you know
alone I'd be in my truck I didn't have a
canine yet you know and now I just I
just retired with like your marshal I
have Apollo yellow lab English lab she's
amazing never gonna bite a bad guy but
she's gonna lick him to death and try to
should try to you know turn him our way
but I didn't have a companion dog at the
time and I would go and run into these
guys and go okay this is what I learned
in the Academy that you know that that
head on spotlighting stop that you never
want to have or getting behind and
blacked out and tracking him down and
next thing I know I got a case and I got
all these frickin prohibited exotic
weapons and I'm going this is crazy I'm
pulling these guys out alone I don't
have a lawsuit just you it was just me
how many guys did you run into sometimes
would be to one night I pulled like
eight people out of a man oh yeah and I
was alone oh yeah and they were all
armed and it was one of my heaviest most
intense cases and I had been on one year
so this was 1994 and what we were doing
in the Riverside squad is we were just
saturating the area because we were
getting everybody from over on the LA
side here spotlight and all our games so
we're like okay let's saturate this and
back venj oh the game was to catch a
spotlight or it handed because they're
so deliberate explain spotlight oh yeah
yeah I should I should have done that
but spotlighting is where you use an
artificial light whether it's a handheld
spotlight a flashlight whatever and you
go into remote areas and you look to
find animals at night because they
freeze they're really
relax their eyes glow and then you shoot
him that way you kill them illegally at
night after dark which is never allowed
you know it's usually in or out of
hunting season because anyone's go
spotlighted deer nine times out of ten
they're they're not licensed or they're
not going to do it during season like we
do so they're doing that so in the in
our world as game wardens that's the
ultimate wildlife criminal because
they're gonna kill those you know that
that have that unborn trophy buck for
good genetics they're gonna kill a
trophy deer way in the rut you know that
you know needs to go another year or
whatever so that's what we focused on
that was like if I can cut my teeth and
get you know become a reputable game
warden I'm going after the hard course
that was the game then those 94 and I'm
pulling these guys out and calling them
out on loudspeaker I've got my weapon on
him and I'm like oh man there's a lot of
guys out there I can't get him to jail
I'm calling back up I got Riverside
County coming in I mean we even had the
the the Sheriff's Office helicopter come
in several nights once we got to know
each other and they realized who is this
game warden and what are these game
horns Riverside County going out into
just crazy areas by themself they
monitor our traffic and they come in on
the helicopter and light it up and call
him you know I'll call these bad guys
out on loudspeakers just to make sure we
were okay and feels good when the
Calvary comes on those nights man let me
tell you what sort of situations they
just didn't know that you would ever run
into someone that's that armed that many
guys in a van or what have you
eight people so there was the reason
while you're patrolling by yourself was
because they didn't anticipate anything
like those well and we do know the
bodies right this was one of the things
that was crazy we get back to the thin
Green Line concept and realize that one
game warden is responsible for 200 to
250 square miles give or take whoa and
you know how big Riverside County is on
the in legend one hundred square miles
maybe more you know depending on what
more than one game warden so a squad a
seven game wardens to put in perspective
check this out brother so when I was
supervising traditional patrol before we
started the special ops mat team in
Santa Clara County
we always had vacancies because we
always low on bodies we couldn't hire
game wardens fast enough we weren't
funded for it or where the case may be
so we might have four or five game
wardens for seven positions and we had
to cover all of Santa Clara County which
is everything from the city to all those
foothills and there's a lot of it in
silica
people don't realize all of San Benito
County which is huge
Hollister Gilroy right where I'm from in
Gilroy that whole area down to the south
that is just massive mountain country
full of wildlife and then like part of
Monterey County and I had five people
and myself as a lieutenant that is
insane I can't believe that so to go out
on a spotlighting patrol to that point
and have a partner with you just one
other game warden that's tough you know
you're basically pulling a whole nother
area you can't work night on her so it's
spotlighting that common it it is still
going on in the state and it's going on
a lot back then here because there have
been so little presence here in Southern
California it was off the hook
it was crazy one week in 1994 I remember
I was I had a really good ride along
with me a wildlife biologist such a
savvy hunter great eyes he became kind
of like my right-hand man Bryan and we I
said we're gonna catch a spot letter
every night this week
you think so like what's that crazy
let's see if we can do it and so we went
and worked all night long
we started on Monday night how do you
catch them do you look for a spotlight
like what do you get to a vantage point
you glass it's yeah it's just like glass
in a big basin for elk right right
you're you getting a really good
overwatch that you get the most
visibility you know hide the truck and
you watch and you find areas where it's
likely to happen and it takes a while to
learn where that's gonna be just because
you got this huge district and you could
have 20 places where guys spotlight but
until you get into the areas a new Ward
and really get to figure it all out you
don't know where to be and it's a trial
and error but you know it took me six
months give or take or just just going
out there and scouting hard and you've
seen where this road goes and how does
that canyon look what type of water do I
have down there what am I seeing a low
light in the evening when animals are
coming to water ooh I got a whole herd
of elk here I got a whole herd of deer I
got some bucks you know I'm seeing other
animals running around this is gonna be
a hot spot because guys can get to it
and if you just put the time in you just
kind of lie in wait you know kind of put
your little hide together just like
hunting big game eventually it starts
happening and by 1994 and I've been in
district a year down here I pretty much
had my spots figured out my partners in
other parts of Riverside did too so we'd
all be out alone
so we could cover more area and talk and
back and forth I mean and I'm going to
date myself here but cell phones are
brand new so we all had those flip cell
phones and we're told you I'm gonna be
51 in November I'm 52 yeah yeah so right
there you know all that ers so when I
started I mean it was the flip phone you
know that's not you on communicator I'll
call my partner Jerry they love those
where are you at they're great like
we're yeah because I'm over here in
Thomas Mountain like I'm over here you
see anything yet I go I got one light
working all right I gotta go and then
I'll go so but that's crazy like you're
talking about enormous pieces of land oh
it's you guys are responsible for yeah I
mean for it's hard for people to put
into perspective that don't spend any
time in the woods right that you would
be able to even find these folks in this
enormous area yeah yeah it's start stuff
is a needle in a haystack type thing you
know but once you get into it you get
fairly good at it but it always is
difficult because again just the
percentages of catching a guy on the
right night that he's going to be out
there and then you got the guys that
kind of get savvy to know one where the
game-worn lives drive in by his house
looking for his patrol truck to see if
he's out that night where's the truck
parked we start getting into that
problem so we always kind of you know
kind of maintain as covert as we can you
know we're known in the neighborhood and
the thing is we live at home we work out
of our homes home office we're close to
our community because if we kept our
truck at a field office we have no
response time all spread out so we get
very community-oriented in in community
functions and conservation groups and
everybody knows us whether it's a big
city or a small little town in the
mountains so you got guys doing the cat
and mouse thing looking for us and you
know making sure hey is this truck there
or is he out patrolling well maybe I
won't go out tonight
but but that that era Joe in in 1994 was
was off the hook I didn't get a spot
letter every night that week but I got
six out of seven and one night I had a
double so it was crazy Wow in season a
ton of guns and you know some guys were
going to jail some weren't but a lot of
wildlife was saved that night because
they would they would have done a lot of
harm you know most of these guys are
they doing this recreationally for
father they're doing it for food like
what are they the the group I was
getting into down here it was it was
recreational it might have been to sell
the meat I couldn't prove that or it was
just to go kill stuff you do get people
that need me you know that do spotlight
after
because they need the meat and stuff
like that and it's still a violation we
still deal with it as such but if we
ascertain that we're gonna be fair about
it you know we said okay look you're
poaching I know you're starving it's out
of season it's in season you have a tag
but you just really got to get that meat
I mean there are certain cases where you
just kind of feel for that person ago I
see where the motivation was you know
and a very small percentage of poachers
are that way but some of them are just
you know they're just trying to feed
their family right and they're it's a
whole different game and we're gonna be
fair about it or we should be fair but
most of them gangbangers or most of them
criminals like what does it was zero
down here average down here 70 80
percent yeah had criminal histories had
illegal weapons associated with gangs so
it was almost like recreation for them
it almost was what practice yeah yeah
and I remember one case down here that
was a pretty crazy one it was it was
three guys pretty inebriated pretty
liquored up and there was a head-on stop
and one of them had a like a $50,000
no-bail warrant for cocaine trafficking
out of Mexico and that was in that week
that we had you know crazy spotlight and
things going on so it was just the
demographic a down here we're up north
it wouldn't it wouldn't be necessarily
out felon but that guy that just wanted
that trophy buck and to get it cheap to
get it you know if I could give you a
magic wand okay and you could like I
could say John it's up to you fix all
this how do you do it you have unlimited
resources man that's a great question
and I'll do go into the bottle the genie
right here mm-hmm
one we put more game ones in the field
because we do need more and we pay them
better and here's the rub because
there's this perception that game
wardens just check fishing licenses or
they might not be real cops
we're paid about 40% less than a county
sheriff than a highway patrolman really
than a city police guy right and because
of you think it's because of perception
perception and public lack of knowledge
perhaps now that is so as far as funds
get allocated they say well Morton's
right this is the going rate you know
this is what we've always paid you know
the raise is 30% yeah yeah that's
we're in horror we're in a constant
constant salary equity fight we've been
we've been you know really pushing that
for
you know 15 years plus or minus
something that really started to
legitimize us and in 2010 when my first
book came out war in the woods that's
when the wild Justice game where in
reality show a National Geographic
Channel aired for the first time and
that was our agency and that was the
first of what are now a lot of game
warden shows and the more the merrier
because it's never seen that one yeah
yeah it was it's good yeah it was it was
it was us you know so I'm partially
mostly busting people for wildlife or is
it yeah it said the marijuana stuff - do
you actually get in the marijuana stuff
something the wild justice film crews
really resonated with and a lot of the
guys that are on the team now myself
included ended up being featured like
their main people for the better part of
like three seasons because we weren't
just bringing them the poaching cases
the traditional stuff which needed to
get shown even and we didn't have our
formalized team yet but I was embedded
with Santa Clara County Brian and k9
Phoebe were up in Shasta but we were
getting brought together for the show
and he was starting to work down with me
in the Bay Area and bringing that wonder
dog Phoebe into the mix that he had
honed you know for years and we started
to show this cartel marijuana stuff
through the show and that's what got the
ratings that's what you know that was
worldwide broadcast and number-one hit
on that Geo for three years and that
opened the door you know we needed that
exposure and it's the same thing with
like writing these books and doing the
TV I do it's it's a fine line between
risk and some exposure or getting the
message out and like I said we're so
thin on the thin green line we need all
the exposure we can get we're a little
agency our funding is limited but we're
doing a multitude of jobs even outside
of the marijuana stuff so that started
to help and now we're starting to get
the recognition of the professionalism
and the capabilities we have especially
with this tactical unit totally help
with things like salary and numbers the
magic wand brother is number numbers
just numbers that officers and they're
paid well enough to live in the Silicon
Valley to live here in hell that's
hilarious
right Owens paid well enough to live in
so million right moving out yeah and
that's where that's where I grew up and
if I wasn't embedded there his family
member I couldn't have afforded to stay
and I had great Grey Wardens come in and
do fantastic work that didn't want to
leave Silicon Valley but they're like I
can't buy a house here I got to go to
Butte County I got to go Shasta County I
got my
be in the woods a little bit drive an
hour at work yeah you know so if it has
there been discussion like has anybody
brought this out a Dan Crenshaw was not
aware of this when I discussed it with
him when I was talking about federally
legalizing marijuana right it's not just
about saying it's okay for kids right
but it's a it's about mitigating these
problems that you have with cartels sure
because when there is an illegal
opportunity to sell something right
there's a demand for then the criminals
are going to sell it because that's what
you have now exactly and it has there
been discussion like to someone to bring
this up like this is one of the primary
problems with having marijuana federally
illegal with California having it state
legal that there is this massive
confusion and this you know diminishing
of penalties in California yeah with
growing illegally there totally is and
you know you got the opposite ends of
the spectrum and here's what we're
learning with regulation and I've always
said this I said look if we're gonna
regulate and we need to regulate to stop
this black market let's do it smart you
know let's for one everything we really
tried to push here in California was
regulate legitimate cannabis the correct
way keep people safe test it test it
make sure those pesticides a cartel
pesticides absolutely man and as long as
people aren't hurting themselves or
other people they're not destroying
waterways we're not getting in gun
fights over it great you know no problem
but for like the you know the outdoor
trespassing with these cartels let's
take that funding and put more effort in
to stop and that you know let's not
water it down to misdemeanors and
infractions and do things like that and
and you know it's and and even we can
even take cannabis out of the equation
Joe from the standpoint of I remember a
few years ago I was quoted by The
Associated Press of saying if cherry
tomatoes were so desired on the black
market and we're illegal and people were
paying four thousand dollars a pound for
cherry tomatoes we'd be having gun
fights over cherry tomatoes and having
banned poisons on cherry tomatoes that
our kids would be eaten in their salads
you know because of the black markets so
you can take you know cannabis even out
of the equation and look at the
environmental impacts and look at the
public safety but we have to do
something to regulate this thing
uniformly over the
the board and we have to break the black
market but what I've seen and I go into
the last chapter in my new book hidden
work extensively on this is what are the
challenges moving forward after seeing
regulation in play for two years boots
on the ground watching it and having a
great relationship with legit with
legitimate cannabis growers and I'll
tell you a few stories that really open
my eyes and and got us unified right
because the whole thing is we need to be
unified on this on this concept not
polarize left to right anti cannabis Pro
cannabis
let's get unified environmental safety
public safety all of it but because of
how we've regulated and the licensing
fees and the protocol and everything
else we've had all of these you know
black market growers in the 215 days
that wanted to get legal and saw
everything comin in the cost to do it
and being on Big Brother's radar or law
enforcement radar and they backed out
like in Humboldt County we had it like I
want to stay in the better part of ten
to 50,000 growers ready to regulate and
we barely got a thousand you know and
they went you know I can't afford to go
through this permitting process I can't
afford the delay so I'm just gonna go
back on a black market I'm not gonna be
on the radar Wow and that has to stop if
we're gonna regulate right know the
thing that was was really interesting
and I never saw this coming but when
when we were about to roll out prop 64
and you know it had been voted for
recreational and the medical laws were
tightening up I was the first law
enforcement guy being from a marijuana
enforcement team to to go into these
California grower Association hosted
grower meetings and my first moments in
Santa Cruz right over the hill from my
place right and I mean I'm in the you
know I'm gonna be to use the camo
bottoms the pole oh I'm going into my my
training attire ferment and the look on
500 growers faces when I walked into
that meeting just like what's he doing
here conflict of interest he's working
us he said guys watching our license
plates and I'm just like guys everybody
breathe I'm gonna tell you a story I'm
gonna show you a PowerPoint it's gonna
be graphic I'm not here to work anybody
you know I'm here to unify just hear
what I have to say no judgement and so I
was all these guys aware of how big the
situation was before you show them I
would have thought so because they're in
the industry right they know weed
than just about anybody I would hi all
the time they're not seeing the cartel
just yeah that's all I didn't see that
guts that kind of true camera
what's he got a backpack like three
repels a pipe yeah but anyway explain
that I mean these guys literally would
back in hundreds and hundreds of yards
yeah of pipe and tubing like four hoses
on their back well they're tough yeah
I've got I got photos in the new book on
trail cam with felt on their feet
covering their tracks with these sea
bags 100-plus pounds and a spool of pipe
going up man don't know how hard that is
to do I mean this just took a legit job
yeah it'd be like the best employees
you'd ever have they would they would
been there they're tough and they're I
mean to look at the environment they
live in for six months man yeah they're
all outdoors but I was at this meeting
and I gave the presentation I talked
about it and it was crazy to see a look
of shock on these these grower groups
faces I mean some women were in tears
some of the guys were just like pissed
off and pumping their fists and they're
like that's bullshit we are not about
that we're not about doing anything bad
with our water we like our wildlife we
just want to grow cannabis we want to be
regulated you know and it was such a
turnaround you know from the traditional
relationship between law enforcement and
the cannabis world and just to be the
one guy there with all of the growing
community there and then go from
complete horror that I was there as an
adversary or judgement or anything of
that or you know to to do anything
negative from an enforcement standpoint
to suddenly having real talks of what
was going out and and I could kind of
see the authenticity the genuineness on
some of their faces the way they reacted
to my slides to the videos and so um
when I left that first meeting I
remember I just got flooded in my patrol
truck and I had Apollo with me my little
lab and she's an icebreaker I thought
well it could be an interesting meeting
I should have the dog for pets you know
and she jumped in and I all these
growers were coming to my truck and I'm
packing up my stuff and what well this
is weird and it was all these you know
farmers supervisors from all over the
state
you know Mendocino County up in the
Emerald triangle Santa Cruz and they're
just giving me their card so I go hey
lieutenant I have workers I have
resources
we will hike in and clean up agro with
you let us help the met team let us help
the cannabis program whatever we can do
and no right no charge and and that was
genuine man I was really really taken
back by that in a positive way and I
realized if we get the legitimate
farmers on our side and they're aware of
this they will help market that message
also they have money and they have money
yeah yeah the legitimate farmers are
making a lot of money that would be a
great way for you know we mean tax wise
I mean there's extremely high taxes on
cannabis as it is right but we could
allocate that taxes absolutely to you
guys yeah that would be incredible yeah
where's the money going let's have a
certain percentage of it designated for
wardens that's starting to happen too
because what's now that we've had a
couple of years and we're seeing some of
the regulatory funding and the taxes
trickle back I'm in contact with my team
all the time I still get to see him
periodically and train and do things
like that and really give him a
shout-out for all the amazing you know
risks they're taken in the work they're
doing and promote their message and what
they're out there doing but um the money
starting to come back to us now so we're
starting to get equipment we're starting
to get more bodies we're starting to get
like overtime funding so the ridiculous
long hours and our small team works
they're compensated for that just just
happened literally you know within a
month or two of being on the show with
you so we're seeing some positives
coming that those rates raised we're
trying yeah we're trying alert the press
40% is discussed this up this coffee
saucy damn good man I'm not even a
coffee drinker and I'm loving this stuff
it's great style cover now it makes your
mouth smack though gives you a little it
does a little yeah you know like yeah
clear you throat a lot yes I'm American
healthy Colorado was the first state to
legalize it in Washington State
do they have similar problems they still
have a black market you know and the
thing right now because we're not
regulating federally and so every state
anything that's grown stays in that
state per law right but every all the
demand is back east in these
non-regulated states all right I don't
grow it so Colorado has you know an
interstate black market that's done by
the you know quasi legitimate growers as
well as the cartel element so
there's still that black market thriving
within you know the black market
cannabis industry that isn't cartel
public lands we've got different mixes
and we've okay so it's a different kind
of a problem in Colorado so they don't
have as many cartel grows not as many
they have some they have some I've I've
talked to those guys and worked with
them a little bit and they do have some
but again they're kind of like more I'm
at Montana now tight little growing
window you know early winners late thaws
so they don't have a very big growing
season outdoors look the conditions
aren't prime like they are here in Cali
this is a this is a giant issue that is
largely undiscussed and it's one of the
reasons why I was so fascinated by that
podcast is there and this is one more
one more piece of the puzzle when you're
talking about border control right that
somehow or another we've gotten into
this this state in our country this this
place in our country where some people
want to control the border and some
people don't want any borders right and
you have to understand that this is the
number one problem with the border the
number one problem with the border is
cartel violence hotel violence cartel
crime that's the number one problem and
the giant percentage of these people
that are coming over and doing illegal
activity are doing it because it's
profitable right the reason why it's
profitable is because it's illegal and
so they can do these things and and sell
marijuana right all over this country
illegally because it's illegal and if it
was legal we could regulate it we could
tax it the money could go into schools
and pay for guys like you and and go to
fixing this problem and instead we're
playing this little stupid game where
you know some states are legal in some
states aren't and you know let's let's
you know and it's federally it's still
Schedule one crime when there's millions
of legitimate law-abiding taxpaying
citizens that enjoy it and it's crazy it
is and into that point you know you you
look at you know the discrepancy and
just the inconsistency on cannabis
regulation some states some nine not
really not but when you get to the
border issue you brought up that good
point of it's not just that cartel
element for this can of this poison
cannabis stuff for this toxically
tainted cannabis is a better way to
phrase it
it's the smuggling you know the human
trafficking it's all those other crimes
that may have said amine production so
I'm not a you know I get asked a lot
like after you know you had a great
conversation with with Mike Baker on
this was you know our open borders gonna
work and know we gotta have some
regulation it's just not gonna work
because this is the world's not even so
that's why open borders not gonna wear
it right if the world was even and there
was you know there's like extreme crime
right Louis and you know I had II D
called Iran on who works for yeah Mexico
we just started dialogue and last week I
like that good guy yeah boy is he scare
the shit out of you though the stories
about Mexico about how bad is down there
yeah and there's there's just an insane
amount of violence that's going on down
there and it's insane amount of crime
and so much of it is connected to the
illegal drug trade yeah and look you're
not gonna kill at all if you make
marijuana legal but you would kill a
percentage at least it would make it a
little bit better and it would stop that
yeah and one of the things we get from
from getting that regulation if we can
stop that black market for you know
cartel weed we're gonna save a lot of
wildlife yes we're gonna preserve a lot
of waterways right because all those
other crimes are very heinous and very
destructive and I hate to see the human
trafficking and all the meth problems
and and anything that relates to
violence or deterioration of a soul but
you know I love the wild man woods irma
Church yours too I mean what you do for
conservation the elk honey that you're
doing and all those different things I
mean it's just it's magical out there
and it's just most people just don't
even know I don't think no but I mean
don't get a chance to experience what
it's like to actually yeah real woods be
in the real woods which are getting
shrinker smaller and smaller and smaller
even here in Cali that has so much
beauty but I look at it this way I said
look if we lose all of our open space to
a problem like this and it compounds the
problem and we lose our wildlife and
good water you may not be into the
outdoors right now you might be a
preservationist you might be you know on
your freakin digital device all the time
and looking at wildlife through a screen
but if you ever do go out and you get
that peace and tranquility and you get
centered like we do run a trail Hika you
know LA County Mountain
trail open-space don't even get that far
in the woods it's just soothing yeah you
know brings us back to our Center and
you know if the new generations that
aren't getting that from the cities can
get that or they get their kids doing it
or their grandkids are here about it but
it's not there to go to you that to me
man I we're just we're just not paying
forward enough so this is this is
something I got to stay on and I really
appreciate you and what you stand for
because of the message I think just so
many people don't know yeah I just think
that's a big base they don't know what's
interesting to me - is that the
allocation of resources that it'sit's so
when you have something that's illegal
you're not getting any of that money no
and if it was legal there's an enormous
amount of money that could go to schools
and fix the roads and we can allocate it
to a bunch of different big time really
positive ways to spend it yeah and we're
not doing that and it's it's the reason
why is because it's illegal and this
this crime problem is very similar to
what they faced during Prohibition with
alcohol and you'd the rise of organized
crime I mean right that's where they
were getting their money from because
there was such a demand it's really a
disgusting dumb way to approach a
problem that is many people's ideas a
social problem that money could go to so
many different positive things yeah when
we're perpetuating it through that
reason and many others were basically
you know we're basically embedding the
problem in our country and Ed said this
Calderon we were dialogue and earlier
this week and he said you know he's kind
of looked at things from the border and
south and the issues coming in from the
border from the cartel front he said you
know now I'm getting into your book and
I'm starting to analyze what your you
guys are fighting on the ground inside
the borders in California in the rest of
the country goes it's embedded now I
mean it's not like it's just coming
across I mean the enterprise is embedded
here in the nation because they have the
pipeline they have the distribution they
have a market and they don't have to
deal with a border issue and they're
comfortable because of exactly where
we're at and yeah what people aren't
aware of in California that it's just a
misdemeanor which is even more ensue
yeah it's that's got to change
that's got to change you know I mean it
should be something horrendous if you're
if you actually have a background in
crime
right especially particularly violent
crime when you get caught doing
something like that I mean it should be
severe severe penalty it should
absolutely be severe now the the saving
grace of that is when we get the
environmental crimes that we bring from
the Fish and Wildlife standpoint to
those charges for these guys we get it
back to felony status because we had an
interesting thing happened as soon as
all that regulation started two years
ago and the what you know those trespass
grill crimes were watered down to what
we're talking about District Attorney's
all throughout the state said oh men
we're not going to be able to prosecute
these crimes I mean we're not gonna have
you know we're not gonna have a jury
that's sympathetic to these issues it's
not worth it some sheriff's departments
were saying hey we know how violent
these guys are we know your team's been
in like six gun fights man your partner
was almost killed and no five and the
first one you guys take these guys head
on you know you want to protect your
wildlife whatever but they're not
stopping and it's a misdemeanor and we
can't convict them so we're not going to
play so a backlash of those crimes being
watered down Joe was team stopped
working it except us and like the feds
you know and not only that DA's couldn't
prosecute so I remember speaking for the
California District Attorneys
Association on this and saying guys
there's a solution everybody no matter
where they sit on the cannabis spectrum
everybody hates to see Bambi dead water
poisoned everyone has a little bit of
environmental passion in them on both
sides of the fence and that's where I
say here we get to the Ute we can unify
and not worry about where we sit on the
per for against and if you take these
water code enhancements if you take the
felony on the penal code from the ban
toxics like carbo fear in if you take a
streambed alteration diversion or dead
wildlife or littering close to a state
waterway you stack all those up you get
all these penalties and you can convict
on that you know even in a sympathetic
jury on say a cannabis issue so we
started to prosecute these cases and
they started to come back and it's an
arduous end around it's more work than
we should have to do but but we're doing
it now when they find these cartel
members and they bust them and then do
prosecute them for these felonies what
happens do they they don't get deported
right they stay in this country in a
jail here it depends
they'll go to jail here if it's a
sanctuary type state scenario and
they're gonna you know stay in our
justice system and they will do jail
time here if we're working with ice and
our feds and homeland security
especially ice agents and they clap our
classified as a deportable felon they
will get deported
but get on a watch list or did did they
get deported to jail or do they just get
freed well they're supposed to go back
and be in custody over on that site does
that always happen air quotes yes -
supposed to operative word suppose
especially if there's someone who's high
up in the cartel or is making a good
Monday for the cartel right it's highly
likely that with a lot of corruption
they might go free very very true and
the case has happened where we've you
know got some of these cartel growers
deported and a week later they're in a
different growing in Northern California
we've had some situations where we've
we've seen the same guy really four 20
times what no joke so you've busted them
how many times we did or another team
did or sources tested 20 times yeah
they've been Liban and they're still
here and they're still your holy shit
because of what you just broke in system
yeah it's the checked right and what you
just said it's like because of because
of the money involved and we know and I
go into this and hit more a little bit
what I can talk about under you know
just what we learned without putting
names out there is it's four to seven
thousand dollars for these grow
organizations in these cartel cells to
bring their best growers back across and
it's a drop in the bucket and they don't
even consider the border a border they
consider it like a speed bump on the 405
freeway so how do they get guys in do
they use boats do these tunnels all of
it all of it boats I was always thinking
like how the fuck are you gonna protect
the border when you just get a boat and
just kind of like well Hoss and pulling
somewhere in California and hop out yeah
well something something we learned
recently and it's been about the last
five years and it was really starting to
hit the California coastline and the
Oregon coastline heavy when we started
our unit in 2013 was these panga boats
and you know they start where Penge it's
called panga PA nga called a panga boat
and they're there you know the the
inside the Mosel on Peninsula and
they're loaded up with 6,000 pounds of
tainted weed but grown to Mexico same
stuff they're doing here for the same
toxic sore man
or people or both and a couple of
growers or you know transporters and
they'll run this boat it's a one-way
boat and it's there's a lot of money in
it you know there's big four-stroke
motors it's painted kind of the color of
the ocean so it's hard to pick up from
the air goes kind of fast it's made to
carry big loads and they'll take that
thing around the peninsula they'll fuel
up offshore somewhere off the San Diego
coastline maybe 100 miles out he's going
ah there it is nice Jamie well that's a
lot of weed that's a lot yeah I got some
pretty cool pictures in the book so
these guys just pull the boat in and
then this is obviously one that got
busted yeah and then they just have
someone waiting for them and exactly got
stuff in the trucks and they got a
distribution network ready to go and
then that boats just disposed of and
it's yeah ladies and gentlemen this is
all because of an illegal demand because
it's illegal this stuff wouldn't be
profitable if we were growing it here in
the United States and if the only way
you would sell it at a store was if it
was regulated and licensed and you knew
that it was tested and it was all grown
here he had a certificate of where the
farmer was and it that element of it yes
you take that element completely out of
it and they would but you know obviously
they're still selling fentanyl and all
sorts of other shit that we don't want
legal yeah but it's so dark it's such a
confusing confusing it was this Banga
boat found with 18 million dollars worth
of weed that is a lot of weed as weed is
not expensive how is a boat got 18
million dollars worth of weed that's a
heavy load that's a typical load to Joe
and that was probably one of the
Monterey boats we helped on because we
interdict it a lot there but yeah it's a
daunting task when you look at that dude
on the right all I said just shoot him
super angry yeah very mad yeah I mean
obviously I'm not kidding about shoot
him but yes there their situation is
just as grave I mean you live in in
Mexico and you're fucked and there's no
way for you to get by legally and you're
a young man you get recruited into one
of these cartels the next thing you know
you've been in for ten years and you
committed a few murders and you're
involved in your drug trafficking and
you're well that's lower yeah you're
down the slope it's done how do you get
out of that you really don't there's no
there's no avenues for them is
established you know community outreach
centers like hey cartel members like
lunch you just grow cherry tomatoes
instead right or you know there's no
positive reinforcement some people that
give a shit you know it's horrible yeah
I mean and a lot of that again is backed
by illegal drug sales if you don't have
a legal drug sales you don't have nearly
as much profit or incentive and you have
less of that yeah it sounds
counterintuitive for people to make
things illegal that are legal or make
things legal that are illegal and you
would you would stop with a crime but
that is really how it works it is and I
always look at it this way said look it
regardless of where you sit on the
emotional spectrum on this yes against
cannabis for cannabis let's all look at
the issue of environmental purity safety
in America and really be realists of
what's going to help the problem and you
hit it on the head when you said well
yeah there's all that mess stuff going
on and this that and there is but I'm a
realist and we got to do something right
now yeah and I think if we're gonna
figure lis federally regulate to any
type of consistency we're still many
years off from that you know so what are
we gonna do in the meantime if that's
going to happen we still got to deal
with this this grow mess going on in
predominantly California and all this
stuff getting out to our public and
being tainted we still have to deal with
the meth issue and the gun running and
all of that and and knowing that it's
embedded in our country we need to have
people aware of it and we not only law
enforcement but bring bring that thin
green line a little bigger with
conservationists like yourself and
people that are in the know people that
are in the outdoors and just putting the
word out I mean it's it's crazy that ten
years have passed since the first book
and ten years have passed since we did
those you know that's three good years a
while justice TV but in that interim
it's been a specialty of ours we built a
team that's you know notice now for
being pretty you know pretty innovative
and progressive and non-traditional but
putting up some pretty good numbers when
it comes to the environmental damage and
the public safety issue and how much we
took out and bad guys we caught and what
our what our can't what canines did
especially canine Phoebe but we're only
drop in the bucket yeah you know it's
one team out of part of the state and
other teams are doing some stuff too at
the federal level and state level and
we're only getting maybe 50% of this
stuff if we're lucky is it really that
much its if 2% high that's that's all
to Mystic yeah that's against magic wand
yep if I gave you the magic wand John do
whatever you want how would you how many
more officers would you hire how big
would you make the task force I had much
would you branch out your operation I'd
make the tactical unit the Met team of
the tactician is going just after the
cartel front that we formed I you know
triple or quadruple it you know have a
team like maybe four teams in the state
you know have them all trained together
have them all uniformly committed to
tactics and training because it is it is
quite advanced what some of our guys
have done went from a sniper team
tracking to you know all the stuff we
get into not only for this job but for
anything else we come up with right from
up from a from an American public safety
threat after 9/11 stuff changed and we
hadn't got into this grow mess yet Joe
you know with to the level of the cartel
front but I knew back then you know game
wardens are gonna have to be tactically
trained as well as any other law
enforcement officer and we're gonna have
to have our own tactical unit because
we're doing some pretty crazy stuff for
wildlife crimes you know and then
Homeland Security on a potential
terrorist threat you need to have
tactical units that are there with every
other agency and military teams because
we're all thin in numbers and if
something big goes down I need to know
that the sniper team we built with met
and these tactician --zz can go in and
integrate with San Jose PD SWAT they can
integrate with military personnel you
know wherever same type of deal and
we've used we've gone the same direction
with some of that good training and
found the right people to do that just
under a game warden umbrella because
it's got now crazy so it is crazy that
you guys were required to do that I mean
it's sort of like asking a teacher to
also be a kickboxer or something right
right the idea that you guys were
supposed to be doing one thing yeah
which is the again warden and then all
of a sudden you're involved in narcotics
trafficking and cartel operations and
getting shot at and you're bringing in
dogs and ya know these dogs that you're
training you know Phoebe was like that
was very interesting listening to how
effective using Belgian Malinois is that
we're using yeah primarily our main dogs
a Belgian male and you know our powerful
dogs they are amazing they're so smart
yeah just in their eyes no way you can
see it
as I came in how you doing yeah yeah
they're not like looking at a poodle no
they're not like looking at our labs not
that sweet little face hang out yeah
yeah the thing that's that's cool about
these dogs and um and I can't talk
enough about it man because no matter
where you said everybody loves a good
dog story and you know some people say
well dual-purpose you're gonna bite guys
what's with that is it you know really
aggressive and when you look at it's a
lifesaver for everybody it's a lifesaver
for us it's a lifesaver for the suspect
too because it usually involves a
potential gunfight that the dog
basically you know alleviated because
she or he was there so we got our k9
program in agency going kind of full
speed around 2008 ish I mean at three we
have three levels of k9 we have like the
companion right along k9 that kind of
does everything with yeah she's never
gonna buy to anybody and that's Apollo
that's like my lab right and then we
have the detection level dog and most
looser Labradors like Marshall like
Apollo because labs have such amazing
noses they really can hold on scent you
know they can trained to detect many
scents and we certify them in different
things and then there's the Phoebe's you
know the Belgian mouths or the shepherds
and really it's become mostly mouths now
in our agency and um they just do better
in the heat you know Shepherds are
longer haired and we're in hundred
degree weather we're on long hikes you
know or unsupported those dogs might
have to sit quietly after hiking eight
miles and sit in a prone quietly while
we're watching and observing and
stocking it on suspects to make an
apprehension and arrest safely and
hopefully avoid a gunfight so and we've
also found with the with the mouths like
I said they just hold up better on
average and there's certainly exceptions
to that but when we got our dual purpose
program back on track these are dogs
that will bite when they need to on
command but they have great noses so
they'll still detect wonderfully you
know finding evidence finding tainted
weed whatever the case may be a firearm
a bear gall bladder all of that but
they'll also you know like Phoebe was
nicknamed the fur missile because when
it was time for her to go to work and
some guy was going to pull a weapon on
us
she was all business and a cool thing
about a dog like her and and and my
krill and I got into this on his show
especially and he was blown away he said
I've never heard of a dog in a domestic
law enforcement team that's had like she
had 116 apprehension bites in her career
and she had hundred and sixteen no joke
joke 16 cartel guys out there telling
stories about this dog yeah they're
saying no more perro
I've been bit too many times no but the
cool thing about that was the standpoint
of life she saved and she also arrested
another eight to nine hundred that she
didn't have to buy it in her career
that's a lot how many have you guys
arrested when I retired we were over a
thousand Wow in in five and a half years
yeah and we and again all these all grow
ops all grow ups yeah these are all grow
ops are related to grow up so that these
are all guys that are armed all guys
that have knives or guns you know that
you're not getting bit unless you know
you're a deadly force threat on some
level or a significant threat so yeah
it's been a lot of guys so that number
that you're talking about ten thousand
that really is conservative very I think
it's very much so yeah that is so insane
because if you fly over like Humboldt or
any any of these areas particularly meta
sino northern California
yeah the density of the forests of the
the the public land out there yeah
there's a lot of land there's a lot of
land and a lot of you know potential
we're not seeing so and that's still
still thriving so when you you know when
you when you look at Phoebe as a canine
and you go well let's see she was in the
field doing these type operations for
about seven or eight years and yeah
that's great from a record standpoint
and numbers and the life she saved but
it gives you like a like a snapshot of
the issue how many guys did we not catch
that were out there or right that we
weren't involved in you know we weren't
involved so and the dogs of just save
lives man they have saved Phoebe I go
into this in the new book especially in
2012 but right before our team started
Phoebe saved my life Brian's life and
all these other operators in Santa Clara
County in Silicon Valley right where I
grew up because she engaged a guy that
was pulling a Russian automatic pistol
on me and I was the support for the for
Brian I was basically his k-9 handler
or support guy and Brian had to deal
with this other growers partner that had
a big Terrace judge revolver on his hip
and he was pulling it so he goes for
that guy and says John just take my dog
and Phoebe's Anka by 8 and he's biting
this guy in the calf and you know this
guy's nose down and we don't know he's
got this weapon and I started to see it
coming out and I get on him and I do
what I need to do with some physical
control and some strikes and whatnot to
get the gun out of his hand but had she
not been on that guy in a bike show that
guns turned on me at 5 feet I'm engaged
all the rifleman behind me I'm you know
I'm in a gunfight again we've been in
too many of those already how many John
finds do better our team has been in six
and I and I've been on the ground for
four out of the six that our guys have
been involved in and they've all been
around this particular problem we had a
lot less once the team got formalized
and so we started using dogs but we
still had two during the window of the
team being operational that we couldn't
avoid and dogs played a big part in that
as I go into many stories it's so great
I mean when I was listening to that
podcast with Steve Rinella the
meat-eater podcast with you and I was
like I can't believe that there's not
some sort of another division of law
enforcement that gets involved in this
and that we were requiring game wardens
to essentially become something
completely different
yeah well well we still have other law
enforcement agencies involved Forest
Service dedicates a lot of people to it
because a lot of this is on federal
lands so we work at hand-in-hand Sun
Sheriff's Department still work it
BLM works it but very few agencies have
a dedicated team within their unit just
for this problem and it was a big step
for us and even though it's not a
traditional thing like we'd like we kind
of talked about when we started all of
us that are doing it want to do it I
mean we really everything we do like I
said is important we'll never negate
anything a wildlife officer game where
it has to do but for us that see this
problem is the most severe which we all
acknowledge and you know we're those
kind of team members that have the
military the law-enforcement tactical
experience we're just wired for this
type of stuff and we know I feel like
you know in 28 years of being a game
warden it felt like a 10-year career and
even though we were certainly underpaid
like I mentioned I had a dream job you
know it was really awesome to you know
because you're really doing a difference
I think we're making a difference
exactly I think
every case we make matters and even
though it's an uphill battle and with a
whole regulation debate and stuff every
grow site we interdict and stop and take
that you know tainted cannabis out of
the market or restore that waterway and
clean up that grow site and we clean
them all up now that we go into and the
other agencies now support us and clean
up with their own resources because game
wardens have got so legitimate in
working with other agencies that are non
conservation groups sheriff's
departments right DEA task force type
units and they're like okay we agree we
see we see the value in reclamation
cleaning up these grows to the point
where Obama's drugs are addressed a lot
of us when my team was starting up and
our group was working heavy and it was a
real compliment but finally more
importantly got the news out where he
said I want this model rewarded what
Fish and Wildlife is doing with this
cleanup I mean you guys are arresting
guys that's great you're taking guns
away your key you know obviously
somebody's going to be saved because
these guys are violent deadly and you're
eradicating the plants that's fantastic
keep it out of the market they're
poisoned but unless you're doing that
reclamation component I know it's dirty
and arduous and tiring and it takes
resources you know we're not doing we're
not making the biggest dent
so then funding started to reflect from
the federal level through DEA funding
rewards for reclamation and that was
like one of these men it took it
literally took 30 12 13 years to get
there so when you guys have a situation
like the first one you found in 2004 and
you stumble upon this dry creek and yeah
there's all this debris and it's toxic
chemicals like what kind of a cleanup is
involved here and how long does
something like that take before you can
bring that Creek back to where those
steelhead can run and the way it's
supposed to be we're looking on an
average one full day and we're looking
at having to have a helicopter for a
whole day and happen to have anywhere
between you know ideally 12 to maybe
more officers in there and a lot of it
will have some volunteer groups coming
in we have a program in California Fish
and Wildlife called the interview pee
program the natural resource volunteer
program and when we started our pilot
program in 2013 we did an operation
called pristine to test this theory if
we could have this full-time team being
effective and if it wasn't for like 40
of the
volunteers that our helicopter trained
to go in with us and do a cleanup we
would have reclamators you know less
than half of what we were able to do but
when we do a reclamation it's probably
more expensive than doing the tactical
operation planning and the takedown for
the first part of the phase because you
know helicopters are thousands of
dollars an hour and blade time and
you're bagging up trash you're getting
dirty some of these water lines like you
saw in the spools and I told Stephan on
his show and Mike on his show as well
with meat-eater and Mike drop that you
know we tracked a water line almost
three miles once that was a lot of
freaking pipe it went I mean water
sources in Merced County on the Pacheco
pass Highway in my old home district and
it went all the way down Pacheco pass on
to this private ranch where the gross
started and it was I think was like 2.8
five miles hand laid hand laid and
buried under like you know forest roads
or fire roads you'd see on like a like a
tone ranch yeah 18 inches underground
Wow across the road so in that a ditch
for three miles that's a lot of work
it's a lot of work those guys are
pulling up they should do a real job
there's a lot of money change it fix it
do something different yeah but the the
point of it was we have that we have to
pick up all that pipe yes you know so
how long is it gonna take you know two
of my guys Andry miles of pipe eighteen
inches of ground yeah that ever that was
a couple days you know on an average one
we're gonna go a quarter to half a mile
at least and you know even though that
black pipe isn't poisoning the water
directly once all the poisons are taken
out that water line is an infrastructure
piece that it's their black gold I kind
of used the term black gold when I start
teaching to this that if you leave that
water diversion in place and you take
out their whole grow site you know you
take out their camp and all that but all
they got to do is reconnect the water
line and put a tent up and bring in
seeds and get their little camouflage
system going very small investment to
put a grow back there and one of the
things that really got other agencies
convinced that we need to reclamators
not only on an environmental protection
standpoint because other agencies care
about the environment but it's not a
mandate that we're not funded for it but
it would it was something like it's also
deterrence because when we debrief some
of these guys we caught these upper
levels and I I dive into this in the new
book especially I finally got to ask the
gins to these upper-level you know
cartel guys running grows and running
math run at all and I said you know it's
interesting we notice that when you got
when we eradicated grow site
traditionally back before we changed
this process and we just take out the
plants and we leave we notice there's a
girl like there back there next year or
maybe two seasons again and it's the
same group and the answer I got was well
we know how taxed you guys are and how
much resources you expend and you can't
possibly get all of our grows so we'll
try it you know and 50 percent of the
time even though it was rated like two
years before and it's on your radar will
actually get away with the harvest and I
asked well if we start doing this
reclamation and we take all your stuff
out and restore the waterway and move
the tents and and just completely
sanitized the site let all the natural
growth come back preserve the creeks he
said then we're not going to come back
to that too much effort we're gonna
bring tens of thousands of dollars in
new infrastructure we're gonna have to
run a whole nother water line it's
already on your radar you know from a
couple years ago when you guys rated it
that's not a good business investment in
a business model for us to take that
chance
and we kind of knew that because we were
seeing the trend on the ground but to
hear it from this guy's mouth mmm and
validate what we suspected and have a
comeback is true and all the other
things I got to learn I mean just it
changed a game for us and that happened
I'm gonna say about a year to a year and
a half right before we started our unit
so we went in building the met team in
2013 with this mind set in place and
Nate Arnold who was the district a
captain at the time my partner in
building this and I'm gonna give a shout
out right now and it might carry on who
was her chief of the law Enforcement
Division and one of my mentors and
friends way back ting the Academy in 92
he greenlit us to test this program and
take all of us out of patrol in an
already depleted force so you can
imagine there was some resistance there
was some middle management and executive
staffers like why are we doing this
we're not supposed to be doing marijuana
work it's drugs when you cleaning up
grow sites chase some bad guys and Mike
said no I believe in you guys
test it document it and see what we got
to do with this and
we were six weeks into a three-month
test program and he is the chief and all
the deputy Chiefs had talked about what
we were doing out there and we were now
documenting these insane numbers of what
was happening and he said we're done I
want a full time by January 1st 2014 get
your testing do your interviews get the
protocol you guys are leaving Patrol you
know we're gonna have this many spots
and you're gonna work straight for Head
Quarters straight line kind of like a
military special special ops team that
just works for the top they don't really
a boundary so where they go you know and
that's kind of the approach we needed we
needed to do a global statewide approach
with no you know hangups to work with
whoever we needed to within and without
of our agencies and educate and it was
really successful and we but we had to
break tradition so to your point we like
what we do because you said it best
we're making a difference every little
grow we get out of circulation makes a
difference but it is it's an uphill
battle because we know we're not getting
them all and we know it's not going away
anytime soon it must have been very
interesting to talk to the cartel
members and have them say to you that
they know that you guys are taxed oh
yeah yeah shit yeah like they know they
know you know your operation they know
like how do they know they just they
look at the number and end I mean we get
so little information because they're so
my eyes for when you like you're talking
to them how many days do you get with
them we got an interview just you know
one this was one with DEA and a bunch of
other officials and multiple
interpreters and I get to sit in on it
and it was what something that bring
Phoebe baby wasn't there on that one but
but I do have a good Phoebe story yeah
many of them actually but but a good one
and it was it from that one where she
saved that another gunfight from
happening but but the thing about it was
we don't get to talking very often when
we do it's it's very rare that they'll
talk they're put together in an
organization where they don't really
know last names they only report to one
person a lot of times they don't know
who they're working next to so it's
compartmentalized very compartmentalized
and they do this to make sure that
people cannot go back exactly can I talk
cannot reveal very much information I
know a first name of my boss who's my
supplier so um this was someone that was
taken on other cartel crimes at high
level but not a violent guy you know he
was very candid and straightforward he's
responsible for a lot of
stuff in California and I can say that
much in other parts of the country but
what he revealed was just validating
what we knew but it gave it gave us
tools to progress and learn from that
yeah I was gonna say when they when you
do get that information from him
did that allow you to get more resources
or to like confirm like hey look this is
what we know we need to pull out all
this infrastructure we need to pull out
these pipes if we don't they're gonna
come back it is this is gonna make a
difference it did and when we when we
formed with the new team we said here's
how we're gonna approach this
we're gonna we're gonna help agencies
we're gonna do our own missions we're
gonna help other agencies that are doing
the work but we're gonna do it under the
caveat that we're going to do a three
prong approach we're gonna apprehend as
diligently as we can and catch these
guys through our dogs through our
tactics because you know just chasing
them around and know when they're going
to get away there's no deterrence in
that and yeah it's risky and yeah it's
dangerous but at least I know if I take
them into custody even for a day of five
days whatever maybe they're deported
maybe they're not that's one really
skilled guy doing a lot of environmental
damage that's at least out of
circulation for a while yeah right so
that had to happen we're gonna eradicate
every tainted plant and 90% of these
grows they're all tainted with this
carbo firends so they have any percent
90% it started 10 years ago is about one
out of two and by the time those stats
were trickling at the end of 2018 I was
compiling for the team I'm like oh my
gosh man we had carbo Furion and like 89
or 90 percent of every gross site we
went into on these trespass grows but
then the third thing we had to do and we
would only want to work with agencies
that agreed is reclamators gonna be
dirty guys we might have to come back a
different day but give us your
helicopter team give us some bodies yeah
and it's there's no specific reclamation
like group like it's like it seems we
should have an agency that does we don't
have that in place yet and this an
original Creek that you guys had in 2004
did you guys read divert the water we
did and so yes all we actually can't let
her flow on again yeah it took two years
to get the fish back on that one and
that was literally what numbers of fish
do you guys think you lost in that oh
man I mean the the steelhead are
federally listed right now in their
Valley
like 20 to $30,000 of fish yeah there's
a threat so catch and release of that I
wanted to ask you as a game warden you
know I'm not a fan
yeah of catching really you don't like
to catch or release well it's weird like
I like fishing for food right I mean
it's like I don't want to shoot a deer
with a blow dart either and just go look
I got 100 right and then let them like
wake up Jesus and get out of there no
I'm doing it for food yeah yeah I mean
look I know steelhead fishing is fun I
know it is it looks it looks awesome
I've never caught steelhead but I've
caught salmon of crown they're amazing
sure there was gorgeous fish but
catching them and shoving a hook in
their head and then letting them go just
seems stupid it's not yeah it's
counterintuitive you uh you don't eat
them at all steelhead at all well if
they're listed and they're so threatened
the way to keep steelhead fishing going
I know like in California is okay guys
you can catch them but you got a release
that's so stupid you know so but now
what about Oregon and Pacific
Northwest's they do they keep them there
in some places they do is just good
eating fish yeah yeah it's a rainbow
trout right yeah derivative yeah but
it's but it's spawning is coming from
the ocean it's going up a river its
spawning going back to the ocean so
that's what makes it a steelhead yeah
and it's an awesome fish this man can
fight like crazy and it's just they do
really natural they're tough yeah and
you just look at the you look at how
sensitive they are and in that one Creek
and the 2004 grow that was the worst
scenario that could have happened right
that they hit the headwaters of the
start of this spawning channel that went
to a creek called coyote creek that
actually went all the way into San Jose
to the South Bay of the ocean so that
pollution situation from those banned
poisons was just decimating you know
three to five miles of creeks so we had
to take that water away diversion out we
had to clean it all up
honey clean it up net it up bag all the
trash pull all the water lines you know
what about the pesticides how do you
clean that if it's if it's banned we got
to basically get a hazmat team to pull
it out you know we got to put it in
hazardous material buckets cap it real
carefully you know and then and then
just get it out safely what's the stuff
that gets into the ground you got to
move remove the soil you got to go
through it and we can't always do that
and something that's interesting and
we get into this especially in book 2 is
there's a group called ier C at a UC
Davis dr. Murad Gabriel and his
colleagues and they're going in as an
NGO and they're the scientists that
really validated the devastation these
these banned poisons do when the Pacific
fissure that was almost completely wiped
out as a threatened species in
California was linked to DTO grow
poisons and that and that kind of came
to surface about five or six years ago
and then the kind of the light bulb went
off that hey this is an outside
scientific group of an NGO a
non-governmental organization that's
working hand in hand with California
Department of Fish and Wildlife and u.s.
Forest Service but they're showing the
devastation of this stuff in the soil
and in the water well after the Groves
eradicated it's not just you know in and
around the plants all right what's going
on so some of these sites if you don't
do a complete you know soil overhaul and
you know get all that lining out of the
creeks it's not going to be completely a
completely restored and sometimes that
can take you know we might have the
resources to get back in there for a
year or half a year we always try to get
it before the end of the year when the
rains come but it's not always possible
it just can't it can't happen and you
were saying that these pesticides
dissipate off the plant somewhat some
periods of time does that the case with
groundwater and in the ground as well
they dissipate toxicity somewhat
everywhere but they don't dissipate to
the point where they're not harmful on
some level so is a case in point I have
a slide I show on my PowerPoint that
actually came from IRC and we've seen
this multiple times if you know you have
a scientist and he's in the big rubber
nitrile gloves the long-sleeve the face
protection the hat and he's got a gray
fox carcass that right next to a planet
in the soil that he ingested this stuff
right on an unattainable ant and the Fox
died within minutes and then there's a
golden eagle that comes in after and it
could have been days after we don't know
you know and their carrion feeders right
so the Golden Eagle lands starts just
picking just on the surface on the body
of this doesn't even get into the the
carcass and here's a dead golden eagle
in the photo right next to the it's like
man just put a radioactive time bomb in
that animal I mean that's a hot carcass
and that was days after you know when
the scientists are coming back in so
dissipated or not it has its effects we
see that in California with rat poison
yes an eagle or any not Eagles as well
very much so yeah that's why getting all
those toxic sivan the ones that are
illegal out of areas were Al's or any
type of raptors or you know carrion
feeders nope you don't like coyotes but
boy that's the best way to keep those
rodents and things under control those
coyotes sisa balanced yeah I really said
part of the cycle yeah I mean I know
people love their little dogs and cats
and stuff but you know I was having a
conversation with a friend of mine about
it I was like you need those things man
those coyotes are important as gross as
they are well criminals little criminals
the neighborhood little criminals in the
neighborhood but man you hit it that you
got to have that balance yeah you know
and and and like we all say on the
conservation model everything needs a
little bit of hunting control yeah you
know it does the Coyotes need it when
they're overpopulated you know you know
you say it many times in the message
with your guests people need to
understand that we're helping wildlife
as hunters as conservationists we're
helping keep what we have and there's no
way we can not manage them because we've
already developed so much and taken so
much wild space right and we've
encroached and we've had you know a
population of mountain lions it's abdun
flowed and climbed and we've had this
and we've had that so yeah we have to be
involved but this particular problem
that we're facing has so many
far-reaching effects that we don't even
see you know as a hunter it's just
disgusting well as it's so
counterintuitive to people that maybe
animai rights activists or vegans that
hunters are responsible for the reason
why we have such large populations to
these animals and wildlife protection
and how much money comes from hunting
tags and then recreational firearm sales
I mean that's really the majority of the
money that goes to preserve these wild
lands and keep these animals alive and
when you tell that to animal rights
people or vegans they panic right it's
like listen the reason why these animals
exist the reason why they're protected
it's because people hunt them exact
sounds so counterintuitive but you know
you were talking about Rocky Mountain
Elk yeah Rocky Mountain Elk Federation
has done an amazing job on these
really repopulating areas like now they
have successful populations in places
like Kentucky where they were eradicated
at one point time they had been
extirpated yeah and because of it not
because of us because of market hunting
back in the turn of the century right in
the 1800's yeah when people you know
needed food and they didn't have
refrigerators so you would shoot
something and it was only good for a few
days and they would go out and shoot
some more and they would sell that food
and that food was these wild animals and
it was completely unregulated hunting
yeah just a hamburger yeah it's hard
it's horrific I mean we know about it
with the Buffalo cuz we've all seen
those horrific photographs of these
mounds of skulls and yeah but it mean
that was the case with antelope and deer
and and they've done such an amazing job
that now there's more deer in this
country than there were when Columbus
was here yeah it is no he was never here
it's interesting when you bring up elk
because of you know being a worldwide
hunter myself and doing it for so long
I've never taken an elk myself but I've
been on these amazing elk hunts where
I've guided you know people really
deserving of getting their first elk as
an example and you like this story being
a fellow a you know an elk guy we had a
tag in Santa Clara County that was for
one bull for a tule elk and one thing we
have in this this state especially is we
have some of the best tule elk on the
planet you know they're beautiful you
know smaller species and you know great
just just a beautiful animal and um I
saw this tag pop up you know for for
residents or non-residents it was only
one tag but nobody would put in for it
because all our tule elk are in private
land and no one has access so this this
gentleman drew this tule elk tag my
clients only one tag we give one tag why
just because limited numbers we know
it's going to be a private land small
herd we don't want to take too many
bowls and we and we also know that it
access is going to be hard so they say
experiment with one tag and this
gentleman that drew the tag was a 70
year old master hunter education
instructor one of our top instructors
for like four years so he's teaching
hunter ed like we do in the Lord and
front he's paying it forward draws his
tag he had drawn it in a similar County
in Alameda County the year before and
could never get to any access
harvest is elk so I get a call through
the hunter education program like hey
man I know you know your ranchers and
friends there in Santa Clara County do
you have a ranch that we could set him
up on I said I'll work something out
this guy's awesome I mean how many
future conservationists has he raised up
so I found him a spot you know rancher
me and my sister and family grew up with
and had a little little cattle ranch but
he had a beautiful herd you know he did
good have her like 40 animals and some
nice Bulls a couple monsters so we got
him set up to harvest one of those bulls
you know before he was too old to do it
with this tag and we had four
generations there Joe it was great we
had Mike his son his grandson and his
great grandson oh wow and I just had
never seen that
and then I'm helping you know guide him
with the ranch owner and what we thought
was the bull we've been watching for
months you know in all our scouting was
going to be a fairly you know not a
super difficult hunt turned out to be an
all-day affair of course typical hunt
right Murphy's lot kicked in he was
hiding on another part of the ranch end
of the day gets his pull it was just
this magnificent feeling you know he had
worked hard he had paid it forward and
in the whole hunting world through
hunter education and we did an article
in photos where we saw four generations
with this beautiful tule elk and on a
hunter education magazine and I have
that picture you know to this day I just
look at it and go man this is what it's
about this is awesome then the following
year we got that same tag and the 17
year old daughter of a San Jose police
detective friend of mine drew it and she
had been hunting with her dad deer
antelope doing her thing
learning to hand load like like dad
taught her doing it all and she never
shot an elk yet and so we did the same
thing I took her and her dad and you
know we had in fact one of my buddies
from the Santa Clara Matt team Hunter
you'll read about him in book two he's a
big hunter as well and an elk guy so you
know he was in that circle so we all did
it as a big kind of family affair same
things year before what should have been
a fairly you know couple hour hunt
turned out to be an all-day affair and
we end up getting her a nice nice five
by six bull at the end of the evening I
mean it was excellent you know oh it's
the best ever people don't know
yes it's we're lucky it's not
commercially available folks lean
healthy
best yeah delicious yeah but but but
seeing people like that you
harvest an animal they'd never have
access to it's just amazing and then
unfortunately that tag got got
eliminated in our department and I've
been pushing with our well life
management side to bring that tag back
man give them give people a chance show
that we can still do some cool hunting
of a magnificent you know elk species
here in California because it's here
they're just cool yeah I mean hunting in
California is so unusual to begin with
right because we have these big
population centers like San Francisco
and Los Angeles and most people don't
hunt there's less than I think it's
below 1% now for the it is so we're
becoming a non-consumptive State when it
comes to conservation to the point where
our agency is having to deal with more
input and impacts from non-consumptive
users of the outdoors and that's sad to
see you know it's one of the reasons why
I love California and I'm here all the
time doing business but I'm a Montana
resident now you know the wide-open
spaces the mindset gorgeous over there
the conservation you know kind of
mindset and no ding here it's just it's
a different vibe you know that's well
it's a hunter friendly exactly they're
very much hunter encouraged yeah you
kind of the oddball if you're right
well it's people it's part of the
tradition it's people's way of life up
there for so long yeah that it's not
unusual and then the population numbers
are low and there's so much rural area
it just becomes and you know you could I
mean I was there just two summers ago
with my family we spotted a hundred
heard a hundred strong herd of elk
that's magnificent pulled over luckily I
had my nose in the car how the kids
looking out the window screaming and
freaking out they couldn't believe it
because if you never seen you know we
see a deer occasionally in California a
neighborhood will see a deer but see 100
you can see a hundred in that country
and just gorgeous green grass and these
animals just hanging out there and you
know was in the summer so none of them
even had their antlers are just chilling
it's incredibly well it's incredible and
it's funny you mentioned your kids
because I I see it with the nieces and
nephews you know and all the all the
youth I ate in hunter ed and just to see
that go to grizzly island and see a tule
elk for the first time or anything
they're just like what is that yeah I
don't know what that animal is giant
deer did I see that some animation some
pics
movie is that real well when you see one
in real life and you see one scream
that's me that's that was to me I was
hub man
the first time I went to elk hunting my
friend campaigns took me to Colorado and
they was screaming it was just we were
pretty close I mean like within 15 20
that is insane that that animal can make
that noise yes I just got a bugle it for
contact us and it's felt as breath
that's yeah it doesn't get any better
than that but it's just such a
magnificent creature yeah what kind of
an impact has your book and your books
have that has it had on policy and
people recognize that that this is a big
issue and hopefully change you know it's
it's been positive
we were we were you know hopeful that
we'd get a big reach especially with
book 2 and being retired I can speak a
little more freely and you know go more
national I mean obviously when I was
working agency you got to be careful
what you say and everything's are very
very stringently looked at but but it's
been really good because it hasn't just
played to you know the audience I
normally work with conservation and
tactics and law enforcement and hunters
and outdoorsmen and women
it's the cannabis community is really
behind this book I mean they're
promoting it you know they're you know
should flash it on their Instagram page
I mean the Northern California growers
actually look at the Met team they had a
term that that a couple girl were
colleagues kind of coined about two
years ago and they said you guys are
earth warriors this is amazing I like it
and I went oh and you know a special ops
law enforcement team called Earth
warriors in California and I meant it's
accurate that's badass is it very
accurate and and it just shows you that
you know you're not this rigid
tactically oriented stereotypical cop
right you know we're out here for a
while I have waterways and something
that I'm doing with hidden more
especially in book 2 is I look at it as
three-prong you know first thing I got
to do is protect everybody I can you
know and I can do a lot more by talking
and being on venues with you and stuff
like this then I can push in a rifle
anymore or push in the team I can do
more for the team or for the agency by
outreach that they can't necessarily do
so that's that's a blessing
awesome and then the first besides
protecting I want to inform you know I
want to be able to tell this story I
mean I've been doing this for 10 plus
years and I never get tired of it I do a
presentation you and I talk about it I
get the chills I get fired up I feel it
it doesn't matter who I'm talking to I
could talk to ten people or you know
I've been in groups of thousands it's
the same I get fired up I can't I'm
lucky to be able to tell the message
given what we've learned I feel like it
has it it has an impact so so yeah we
are we are getting the reach out there
much further quicker right now has it
changed policy maybe you know it's a
little too early to tell I think it's
going to have some effect from the
standpoint of when we start to see the
non-consumptive users as enraged from on
the issue as well you know equal to or
you know mimicking what you and I as
conservationists or you know people that
are consumptive users that's the third
part of my approach is protect inform
than unify I think we need a documentary
we got something like that coming up do
you really we got something like that
coming up and I in a context like that
changes things for people positive or
negative even when they're inaccurate
you know you hear all sorts of rumblings
about things after a good influential
documentary comes out yeah we're
actually um it's cool you brought that
up because I'm co-producing with a very
good independent filmmaker named Lou
Doris a film called altered state and
this one's been in the works for about a
year and it's it's actually going to be
going to be networked and distributed
through new it's called planet cannabis
Entertainment Network and they're
they're a new channel planet cannabis
Entertainment Network they got 40
million viewers they're doing main
content like other channels are but
they're also doing some you know some
fun and independent projects and this is
one of them and the nice thing is the
reason we're green to do it with them is
there's no content control you know
issues we're going to get to tell an
objective story not biased we're going
to tell you know we're going to be
embedded with legitimate growers that
we've worked effectively with all on the
environmental issue what are the
environmental impacts what's working
what's not working with regulation now
what do we need to do to regulation to
fix it or embed it with law enforcement
teams again doing the work you know I've
done with the team and telling their
story and
we're in production currently so this is
this is gonna be a cool process and I'm
gonna be involved in on the ground and
you know working with Lu to narrate it
and interview folks and and I'll be back
in the field you know all throughout the
state for the next couple of months and
beyond that's awesome well John let me
know when that comes out and I should
really let people know you said about my
Instagram and Twitter and all that job
that'd be awesome thanks Joe and thank
you thank you for everything that you've
done man it's it's it's amazing and
thank you for sharing this story too
because if I had not listened to that
Steve Rinella show I would have no idea
yes I'd only heard my friend talk about
that one grow up that they found but
there was no one there
and I would never have known there's gun
fights and all this crazy shit that you
guys are dealing with yeah Steven was
great because he he thought you'd like
liked the story too and I love your show
and I got a give I like how killer Mike
gave a couple shoutouts on a previous
show so if you'll indulge me I'll give a
couple shout outs here in a minute but
one of the things that I always liked
was how you approach this whole issue
you know and how you came into it not
being a hunter early on in your life all
life and you come into it you know
fairly later in life but just connected
you know and coming from such a broad
demographic of listeners that are
sometimes out out of my world previously
so thank you for your doing and this
will be really cool because the guy's a
media tour saw it too
and and they in the you know to be able
to connect here with you is really cool
and hey the more we can do the message
the better right yes for sure my
pleasure
so um please one more time list the
books tell people where they can get
them yep you can get both books hit more
as a new one more in the woods is the
first one on Amazon you can also get
updates on my website just John Norris
comm and it's an o re s it is not Chuck
not Chuck Uncle Chuck brother from
another mother yeah he's in Orr is but
yeah you can also hit me on instagram
and follow for all that stuff besides my
website it's just Jo HN NMR yes and I do
put this out that if people want to
email me directly and they want a signed
copy of the book or they have questions
and since media tour another podcast I
get so many people wanting to be Game
Wardens now coming out of the military
little kids growing up and I've been
non-stop on that since since Steve show
that's amazing so we're getting more
people out there but for get you guys
more money we're
not a man yeah hopefully someone's
listening yeah thanks for the sentiment
but I got to give a shout-out to Blake B
and Brian and Blake's here in the green
room with me now and I gotta give them
credit for tuning me into your podcast
they're big friends so thank you guys
and I'm also doing a I'm doing a cool
custom knife with Mike Vella camp out of
V knives and we're making the
Trailblazer custom folder it's like the
dream knife show that I never had 30
years on ops but it's an everyday carry
so some stuff there and being an elk
owner you'll appreciate this I'm doing
some pretty cool stuff with axial
precision rifles they're a long-range
rifle company at Idaho they're just
amazing and my partner Terry Kuhn and I
are running that new 300 PRC for
everything from long distance from our
tactical experienced target shooting but
also a good elk gun and that's that's
going to kind of become my my new elk
platform so cool so this is all
connected to you know because of this
your effort that you put out all this
all these pieces are falling into place
yeah and these and these groups are it's
not only about good product you know but
it's about them sending the same message
and they are endorsing the book they're
getting that message out and a lot of
these groups that are that our product
sponsor or anything didn't know you most
people didn't so that's that's one of
the really really cool things and my
publisher caribou publishing and this is
interesting you know I think you'll
appreciate how this kind of comes
together but Henry Wu and my friends
over at a recoil Magazine and Gun Digest
in caribou and blade show and blade
magazine they're all the same entity and
this book with caribou publishing was a
step out an expansion book of national
issues related to things they hold dear
coming from a gun publication you know
and written objectively not against
cannabis so it's really a you know it
didn't seem like the right fit when you
look at it from the outside but it was
perfect you know I think everybody wants
the same objective right they want
safety and for sure anybody who cares
and loves about loves wildlife in these
wild lands they they don't want this to
continue they want this to be cleaned up
and we've got to find a solution we do
and without you guys without boots on
the ground there is no solution none at
all none at all and and like I said we
keep unifying and we hope to just get
more message out there and I'll get some
changes all right day at a time buddy
thank you really
thanks brother thank you so much thank
you really appreciate it you everybody
and
[Music]
[Applause]